Aspiration at the Moment of Death
by Dodrupchen Jigme Trinle Özer

chok sum tsa sum gyi ngowor gyurpa lama dampa nam kyi ku sung tuk  yönten trinlé kyi tsok la
kyab su chi’o
I take refuge in the body, speech, mind, qualities and activity of the noble gurus, who embody
the Three Jewels and Three Roots.
solwa depso chin gyi labpar dzé du sol
I supplicate you: inspire me with your blessings, I pray!
mönlam tabpa di nam drubpar dzé du sol
Fulfil these aspirations of mine, I pray!
mi ngé kyewa né kyewa tamché du pama semchen tamché la sampa ngenpa pu tsam yang kyewar ma gyur
chik
From this life onwards, throughout all my future lives, may I never develop even the slightest
negative intention towards sentient beings, who are my very own parents!
sam jor zangpo chu gyün shyin du gyün mi chépar gyur chik
May my positive intentions and actions flow uninterruptedly like a stream!
za dö kyi tsok khor ma yinpé dorje tekpé lam nampar dakpé tsok khor la longchö ma tok drowa
semchen tamché kyi sha trak zawa dang tungwa dang bakpa la sok chung zé kyang mi chépar shok
chik
With the exception of the pure gaṇacakra feast on the path of Vajrayāna, which does not involve
any desire to eat, may I never consume or be involved in the consumption of even the slightest
trace of flesh or blood from any living being!
damcha di dak dü data shyin du drenpar gyur chik
May I always recall these vows as vividly as I do now!
denpa dang drolwé yönten nyi dang mi den shyin du kor zé len chak la tildru tsam yang mi bakpar
shok chik
For as long as I lack the two qualities of possession and liberation, may I never incur even
the slightest karmic debt based on the misuse of offerings!
semchen chik gi dön du’ang rang gi go sumpo tongwa la tokpa chung zé tsam yang mi chepar shok
chik
May I be able to sacrifice my own body, speech and mind without the slightest impediment, even
it is for the sake of just a single sentient being!
chönyi gyurwa mepa dang chöchen gyu dré luwa mepé denpé tob kyi rang dö dang dralwé mönlam di
nam yong su drubpar gyur chik
Through the power of the truth of the unchanging dharmatā nature and the infallible law of causality,
may these selfless aspirations be entirely fulfilled!
kön chok sum gyi denpé drubpar gyur chik
Through the truth of the Three Jewels, may they be fulfilled!
lama dampa nam kyi denpé drubpar gyur chik
Through the truth of the noble gurus, may they be fulfilled!

When I, Dola Kunzang Shenpen was approaching death, I made this prayer of aspiration and Longsal
acted as the scribe. May it be a cause for benefitting all beings! May virtue abound!

| Translated by Adam Pearcey, 2018.