Detailed Visualization of the Great Compassionate One’s Retinue
by Dodrupchen Jikme Trinle Özer

shar du jetsün drolma kudok kar
In the East is Venerable Tārā, her body white in colour.
chak yé chokjin utpal karpo dang
Her right hand is in the mudrā of supreme generosity and holds a white Utpala flower.
yönpé nyamshyak tsé yi bumpa dzin
Her left hand rests in the mudrā of equipoise and holds a long life vase.
shyab nyi semmé kyilmo trung gi shyuk
Her two legs are in the bodhisattva’s crossed legged posture.

lho ru gyéjé özerchenma ni
In the South is enriching Mārīcī.
shyal chik chak nyi ser dok shyima tro
She has one face and two hands; her body is gold in colour, semi-wrathful.
zur shyal gyen zik yön kum yé kyang shying
From the corner of her eyes she looks upwards. Her left leg is bent and her right stretched
out.
chak yé yishyin wang gi gyalpo dang
Her right hand holds the wish-fulfilling jewel, the king of power.
yönpé chak gi nyidé shyakpa deng
Her left hand holds aloft the sun and moon lasso.
dar dang rinpoche yi gyen gyi dzé
She is adorned with silk and jewelled ornaments.

nub tu wangdzé kurukullé ni
In the West is magnetizing Kurukullā.
shyal chik chak shyi shyab nyi kyangkum tsul
She has one face and four hands, her one leg is bent and the other outstretched.
tsawé chak nyi pemé dashyu deng
Her main two hands hold a bow and arrow of lotus flowers.
okma nam nyi chakkyu shyakpa nam
Her lower two hold an iron hook and a lasso.
taksham rüpé gyen druk petreng den
She wears a tiger skirt and is adorned with the six bone ornaments and a lotus garland.

jang du pakma norgyün lhamo ni
In the North is the Lady Vasudhārā.
shyal chik chak nyi ter bum tengdu shyuk
She has one face and two hands, and stands upon a treasure vase.
dar dang rinpoche yi gyen treng dzé
She is adorned with silk and a jewelled garland.
chak yé yishyin norbu wanggyal dang
Her right hand holds the wish-fulfilling jewel, the king of power.
yönpé gödö künjung né'u lé dzin
Her left hand holds the wish-fulfilling mongoose.
jang sal changchub semmé chaje chen
She is bright green in colour and wears the attributes of a female bodhisattva.
kün kyang rang rang…
Their ornaments and garments are perfectly complete, each in their own respective style…etc.

This was written by Dodrupchen Künzang Shenpen.

| Translated by Han Kop, 2019.