Highway of the Great Yoga
A Daily Practice for the Peaceful and Wrathful Deities of the Self-Liberated Wisdom Mind1
by Dodrupchen Jigme Trinle Özer

namo, chok sum tsa sum ngowo nyi
Namo! In the essence of the Three Supreme Ones and Three Roots,
gyalwa shyitrö lhatsok la
The victorious peaceful and wrathful deities,
go sum güpé kyab su chi
In devotion I take refuge with body, speech and mind.
mönjuk changchub sem chok kyé
I arouse the supreme mind of bodhicitta, in aspiration and action.

ah, chö nam rangshyin ösalwé
Āḥ. The nature of all phenomena is clear light,
yé tong trödral kadak dang
Primordially empty, free of concepts and alpha pure.
lhündrub rang lü dorjé sem
Its radiance, your spontaneously present body, is Vajrasattva.
longchö dzok kü ché dangden
Adorned with saṃbhogakāya ornaments,
tabshé nyimé dordril nam
He holds vajra and bell, means and insight indivisible.
shyab nyi dorjé kyiltrung gi
He sits in cross-legged posture
sengtri pema nyidé teng
Upon a lion throne, a lotus, and sun and moon disk seats.
shyukpé nyinggar shyiwé lha
At his heart are the forty-two peaceful deities,
shyibchu tsa nyi ökü tsul
With bodies of light
tsenpé yongdzok ma dré sal
And all their major and minor marks clear and distinct.
chiwor traktung ngabchü gyen
His head is adorned with the fifty herukas.
rang rang chaluk namgyur dzok
Their garments and appearances are perfect.
drinpar rigdzin pawo dang
At his throat are hosts of vidyādharas, heroic ones
khandrö tsok nam gyutrul zuk
And ḍākinīs in illusory forms.
tewar khandro dé nga la
At his navel are the five classes of ḍākinīs
né sum khandrö tsok kyi kor
Surrounded by hosts of ḍākinīs of the three abodes.
bapü buga tamché kün
All the pores of his body are filled
rigdzin khandro gyatsö tam
With oceans of vidyādharas and ḍākinīs,
takor khandro chökyong dang
Themselves surrounded by ḍākinīs, dharma protectors,
tersung damchen gyatsö kor
And an ocean of oath-bound treasure guardians

dechir ma kyé yongdrub lhar
The deity, unborn and thoroughly established, is clearly visualized.
salwé chiwor om karpo
At his forehead is a white oṃ,
drinpar ah mar tukkar hung
At his throat a red āḥ and at his heart a hūṃ.
gyal kün sang sum ngowor sam
Consider that these are the essence of the three secrets of all the buddhas.
deyang nangtong ku dang ni
Empty appearances are the enlightened body,
drak tong sung dang dren tok tuk
Empty sounds the enlightened speech, and thoughts the enlightened mind.
shyitrö rangshyin nyi gyur né
When everything becomes the nature of the peaceful and wrathful deities
khordé ku sum long du gyur
Saṃsāra and nirvāṇa transform into the expanse of the three kāyas.
om ah hung bodhitsitta maha sukha jnana dhatu a | om rulu rulu hung jo hung
oṃ āḥ hūṃ bodhicitta-mahāsukha rulu rulu hūṃ bhyo hūṃ
Recite as much as you can. At the end, present offerings and praise.
Offerings
om benza puspé dhupé aloké gendhé néwitya shapta putsa ho
oṃ vajra puṣpe dhūpe āloke gandhe naivedye śabda pūja hoḥ
Praise
jömé sherab mi yo chö kyi ku
Inexpressible wisdom, which is the immovable dharmakāya;
dechen longchö dzok ku rik ngé tso
Lords of the five families, the sambhogakāya of great bliss;
tukjé tabkhé gyaché rolpé lha
And deities who display vast compassion and skilful means,
shyitro  ku sum lha la chaktsal tö
Peaceful and wrathful deities of the three kāyas: to you I pay homage!2
Let there be virtue! Sarva maṅgalam!
There is no need for concluding rituals such as the stages of dissolution; just rest in the
inexpressible state.

This was written by Dola at the request of Lekgön Tulku. May virtue abound!

| Translated by Han Kop for the Longchen Nyingtik Project, 2021. With gratitude to Tulku Dawa
Zangpo for providing the text.

Sources: 'Jigs med 'phrin las 'od zer. "zhi khro dgongs pa rang grol gyi rgyun khyer rnal 'byor
chen po'i gzhung lam" in gsung 'bum/ 'jigs med phrin las 'od zer. W4PD1630. 10 Vols. khren
tu'u: bla ma bsod dar, 2014. Vol. 8: pages 265 – 66.
'Jigs med 'phrin las 'od zer. "zhi khro dgongs pa rang grol gyi rgyun khyer rnal 'byor chen
po'i gzhung lam". Gangtok, Sikkim: Dodrup chen Rinpoche, [n.d.]. Pages 1–3.

Version: 1.1-20211213
↑ zhi khro dgongs pa rang grol, revealed in the fourteenth century by the tertön Karma Lingpa.↑
This verse is adapted from the The Ultimate Inexpressible Confession https://www.lotsawahouse.org/words-of-the-buddha/yeshe-kuchokma