The Excellent Path to Omniscience: The Dzogchen Preliminary Practice of Longchen Nyingtik
arranged by Dodrupchen Jikme Trinle Özer

Homage to Rigdzin Jikme Lingpa
Though enlightened from the very beginning, you never cease to take on forms, to tame each in
their very own way.
Though displaying magical appearances of every kind, you are free from aggregates, elements,
sense-fields, form and grasping.
Though appearing in human form, in reality you are a buddha, shining out thousands of light
rays of knowledge and of love.
Not just in this life alone, but always, I rely on you as my refuge: Khyentse Özer,1 fill me
with your blessings!
This is the arrangement of the Dzogchen Longchen Nyingtik Ngöndro.
The Blessing of the Speech
om ah hung ché wang ram yik lé jung mé sek né
Oṃ āḥ hūṃ! From the syllable raṃ (in my speech centre) arises fire, consuming my tongue,
ö mar nampé dorjé tsesum bub
Which is transformed into a three-spoked vajra of red light.2
ali kali takor tendrel nying
In its centre are the vowels and consonants, and around them the mantra of ‘The Essence of Interdependent
Origination’:3
mutik trengwa tabü yikdru lé
Their syllables are like strings of pearls. From them,
ö trö gyalwa sé ché chöpé nyé
Light streams out, making offerings to the buddhas and bodhisattvas, and pleasing them.4
lar dü ngak drib dak né sung dorjé
As it converges back, all the obscurations of my speech are purified, and
jinlab ngödrub tamché tobpar gyur
I obtain all the blessings and siddhis of vajra speech.
The Vowel Mantra
a a, i i, u u, ri ri, li li, e ai, o au, ang ah
a ā, i ī, u ū, ṛ ṝ, ḷ ḹ, e ai, o au, aṃ, aḥ
7 times
The Consonant Mantra
ka kha ga gha nga, cha chha ja jha nya, ta tha da dha na, ta tha da dha na, pa pha ba bha ma,
ya ra la wa sha sha sa ha ksha
ka kha ga gha ṅa, ca cha ja jha ña, ṭa ṭha ḍa ḍha ṇa, ta tha da dha na, pa pha ba bha ma, ya
ra la va śa ṣa sa ha kṣa
7 times
Mantra of the essence of interdependent origination
om yé dharma hetu prabhava hetun teshan tatagato hyavadat teshan tsa yo nirodha evam vadi maha
shramana soha
oṃ ye dharmā hetu prabhāvā hetuṃ teṣāṃ tathāgato hyavadat teṣāṃ ca yo nirodha evaṃ vādī mahāśramaṇaḥ
svāhāAll dharmas originate from a cause. The Tathāgata has taught this cause. That
which brings the cause to cessation—this too, has been taught by the Great Śramaṇaḥ.
7 times
Mantras for Multiplying the Power of Recitation
om sambhara sambhara vimana sara maha dzambha hung
oṃ sambhara sambhara vimana sāra mahā-jambha hūṃ
om mara mara bimana kara maha dzaba hung
oṃ smara smara vi-manaskāra mahā-java hūṃ
Recite the mantras seven times; whatever you say will multiply beyond all measure.
om rutsi ramani pravardhanaye soha
oṃ ruci ramaṇi pravardhanaye svāhā
hri benza dziha mantra dhara vardhani om
hrīḥ vajra-jihvā mantra-dhara vardhaṇi oṃ
Recite this seven or three times, and the power of your mantras will be increased one hundred
thousand times.
To bless your mālā before beginning the recitation of your yidam deity recite this mantra, along
with the vowels and consonants and ‘The Essence of Interdependent Origination’.
Also recite it from time to time over your food, and it will bless it and increase the power
and strength of its nutrition.
1. Invoking the Lama
lama khyen
O lama, care for me!
Repeat seven times calling out in ardent longing and devotion.
nying ü depé gesar shyepa né
From the blossoming lotus of devotion at the centre of my heart,
kyab chik drinchen lama yar la shyeng
Rise up, O compassionate lama, my only refuge!
lé dang nyönmong drakpö zirwa yi
I am plagued by past actions and turbulent emotions.
kalwa ngenpa dak la kyobpé chir
To protect me in my misfortune,
chiwo dechen khorlö gyen du shyuk
Remain as the jewel ornament on the crown of my head, the cakra of great bliss,
dren dang sheshyin kün kyang shyeng su sol
Arousing all my mindfulness and awareness, I pray!
The Four Thoughts that Turn the Mind from Saṃsāra: A Brief Version
daljor di ni shintu nyepar ka
This free and well-favoured human form is difficult to obtain.
kyebü dön drub tobpar gyurpa la
Now that you have the chance to realize the full human potential,
galté di la penpa madrub na
If you don’t make good use of this opportunity,
chi di yangdak jorpa gala gyur
How could you possibly expect to have such a chance again?5

si sum mitak tönké trin dang dra
This existence of ours is as transient as autumn clouds.
drowé kyechi gar la ta dang tsung
To watch the birth and death of beings is like looking at the movement of a dance.
kyebü tsé dro namkhé lok dra té
A lifetime is like a flash of lightning in the sky,
rizar babchu shyindu nyur gyok dro
Rushing by, like a torrent down a steep mountain.6

dü kyi nyen né gyalpo dro gyur na
When his time has come, even a king has to die,
longchö dza dang nyenshé jé midrang
And neither his friends nor his wealth can follow him.
kyebu dak ni gar né gar dro yang
So for us—wherever we stay, wherever we go—
lé ni dribma shyindu jesu drang
Karma follows us like a shadow.7

sé si marik wang gi kyewo nam
Because of craving, attachment and ignorance,
mi dang lha dang ngensong nam sumpo
Men, gods, animals, hungry ghosts and hell-beings
drowa ngapo dak tu mi khé khor
Foolishly go round,
per na dza khen khorlo khorwa shyin
Like the turning of a potter’s wheel.8
The Four Thoughts that Turn the Mind from Saṃsāra
Free and Well-Favoured Human Birth
daré nyalwa yidak düdro dang
Being born in hell, preta or animal realms,
tsering lha dang lalo loktachen
Amidst long-living gods, in uncivilized lands, or with wrong views,
sangye majön shying dang kukpa té
In a world where a buddha has not come, or incapable of understanding:
mikhom gyé lé tarwé dalwa tob
Now I am free from these ‘eight states where there’s no chance for Dharma practice’.
mir gyur wangpo tsang dang yulü kyé
Born a human being, with all my faculties intact, and in a central land,
leta malok ten la depa té
My lifestyle not harmful and wrong, and with faith in Buddha’s teaching—
rangnyi jorpa nga tsang sangye jön
All ‘five personal advantages’ are complete. A buddha has come,
chö sung tenpa né dang dé la shyuk
He taught the Dharma, it has survived, I have embraced it, and
shenyen dampé zin dang shyen jor nga
A true spiritual friend has accepted me—I have the ‘five advantages due to circumstances’.
tamché rang la tsangwé né tob kyang
Although in a position where I have every one of them,
kyen mang ngepa mepé tsé pang né
Once this life, so fraught with uncertainty, is relinquished,
jikten parol nyi du sönpar gyur
I will go on to yet another realm of existence.
lona chö la gyur chik guru khyen
O Guru Rinpoche, turn my mind towards the practice—care for me!
lamgol menpar matong künkhyen jé
Omniscient masters, Longchenpa and Jikme Lingpa, keep me from straying onto the wrong paths!
nyisumé do drinchen lama khyen
Compassionate lama, you who are one with them—care for me!
daré dal ten dönyö majé na
If I do not seize the opportunity this present freedom offers,
chi né tarpa drubpé ten minyé
I will not find such a basis for attaining liberation later on.
dendrö ten la sönam zé gyur né
Once the merit that provided this happy existence is spent,
shiwé oktu ngensong ngendror khyam
After death I will wander as a being in the lower realms.
gedik mishé chö kyi dra mitö
Not knowing good from bad, I will never hear the sound of Dharma,
geweshé dang mijal tsang ré ché
Nor meet a spiritual friend—a terrible disaster!
semchen tsam gyi drang dang rimpa la
Only to think of the numbers and kinds of sentient beings
sam na milü tobpa si ta tsam
Is to realize just how slim is the chance of gaining a human body;
mi yang chömé dik la chö tong na
And even among human beings—to see how their behaviour is so harmful and contrary to Dharma,
chö shyin chöpa nyinmö karma tsam
Is to realize that those who really act according to Dharma are as rare as stars in broad daylight.
lona chö la gyur chik guru khyen
O Guru Rinpoche, turn my mind towards the practice—care for me!
lamgol menpar matong künkhyen jé
Omniscient masters, Longchenpa and Jikme Lingpa, keep me from straying onto the wrong paths!
nyisumé do drinchen lama khyen
Compassionate lama, you who are one with them—care for me!
galté milü rinchen ling chin yang
Even though I have reached this jewel island, the human body,
lü ten zang la jurpo ché yi sem
A fickle and impetuous mind in such a promising basis
tarpa drubpé ten du mirung shying
Makes it no good as a foundation for attaining liberation.
khyepar dü kyi zin dang duk nga truk
Especially when misled by corrupting influences, or with the five poisons raging inside,
lé ngen tok tu bab dang lelö yeng
When negative karma overtakes me, or I am distracted by laziness,
shyen khol drenyok jik kyob chö tar chö
Like a slave—under someone else’s control, turning to Dharma simply out of insecurity or fear,
or merely pretending to practise,
mong sok tral jung kyen gyi mikhom gyé
Or chronically senseless and stupid. These are ‘the eight incidental circumstances that make
Dharma impossible’:
dak la chö kyi galdar lhakpé tsé
When they come upon me, menacing my Dharma practice,
lona chö la gyur chik guru khyen
O Guru Rinpoche, turn my mind towards the practice—care for me!
lamgol menpar matong künkhyen jé
Omniscient masters, Longchenpa and Jikme Lingpa, keep me from straying onto the wrong paths!
nyisumé do drinchen lama khyen
Compassionate lama, you who are one with them—care for me!
kyoshé chung shying depé nor dang dral
With little renunciation, and without the jewel of devotion,
dö sé shyakpé ching dang kunchö tsub
Caught in the bonds of worldly ties and cravings, or with crude, degenerate behaviour,
mige dik la midzem leta lok
Never holding back from negative, harmful actions, and without the slightest real interest,
dompa nyam shing damtsik ralwa té
With vows all broken, and samaya torn to shreds:
riché lo yi mikhom nampa gyé
These are ‘the eight impossible states where mind cuts us off from the Dharma’:
dak la chö kyi galdar lhakpé tsé
When they come upon me, menacing my Dharma practice,
lona chö la gyur chik guru khyen
O Guru Rinpoche, turn my mind towards the practice—care for me!
lamgol menpar matong künkhyen jé
Omniscient masters, Longchenpa and Jikme Lingpa, keep me from straying onto the wrong paths!
nyisumé do drinchen lama khyen
Compassionate lama, you who are one with them—care for me!
Impermanence
danta né dang dukngal gyi mazir
At this moment, I am not ravaged by sickness and pain,
drenkhol lasok shyenwang magyurpé
Nor am I a slave or such, under another’s control.
rangwang tobpé tendrel drik dü dir
So now that I have this perfect, auspicious quality of total independence,
nyom lé ngang du daljor chüsön na
If I waste the freedom of this human life through my own indolence,
khor dang longchö nyé du drelwa ta
No need to worry about companions, possessions, relatives and loved ones,
tachi chepar zungwé lü di yang
When this body I hold so dear
mal gyi nang né sachok tongpar kyal
Is carried out alone from its bed to some desolate spot
wa dang jagö khyi yi drepé dü
To be torn to pieces by foxes, vultures and dogs.
bardö yul na jikpa shintu ché
Then, in the bardo realm there will be nothing but terror in store.
lona chö la gyur chik guru khyen
O Guru Rinpoche, turn my mind towards the practice—care for me!
lamgol menpar matong künkhyen jé
Omniscient masters, Longchenpa and Jikme Lingpa, keep me from straying onto the wrong paths!
nyisumé do drinchen lama khyen
Compassionate lama, you who are one with them—care for me!
Karma: Cause and Effect
gedik lé kyi nammin chishyin drang
The results of beneficial and harmful actions will follow me.
The Suffering of Saṃsāra
khyepar nyalwé jikten nyi sön na
If I am born in the hell realms:
chak sek sashyir tsön gyi go lü dral
On a floor of burning iron, head and body are hacked with weapons,
soklé shok dang tolum barwé tsir
Ripped apart with saws, and crushed with red-hot hammers,
gomé chak khyim tumpar odö bö
Trapped in a doorless iron cell, screaming out loud,
barwé salshing gi buk trochur tsö
Impaled on red-hot spikes or boiled in molten bronze, and
künné tsawé mé sek gyé tsen chik
Burned in a fire of the intensest heat—in the Eight Hot Hells.
gangri tukpö dab dang chukhyak kyi
On the crests of snow mountains, on precipices of ice,
chong rong ya ngé né su buyuk dreb
Terrifying places engulfed by squalls and blizzards of snow,
drang rek lung gi tabpé langtso ni
My tender body, lashed by freezing winds,
chubur chen dang lhakpar dolwa chen
Breaks out in blisters, which burst open into festering sores,
mé ngak gyün michepar dönpa yang
In a ceaseless wail of agonized screams
tsorwé dukngal nakpar kawa yi
And suffering, hard even think about,
zung kyi rab tang chikhé nepa shyin
Like a dying person whose strength is all gone,
shuk ring dön ching so tam pakpa gé
I let out deep gasps and groans, my teeth clenched. My skin cracks open,
sha'u tön né lhakpar gé té gyé
And the raw flesh exposed splits deeper, and yet again—in the Eight Cold Hells.
deshyin pudri tangla kangpa shok
My feet are cut to ribbons in the ‘Plain of Razor Blades’,
raldri tsal du lü la ché tubjé
In the ‘Forest of Sword Blades’ my body is gashed and chopped,
ronyak dam tsü taltsen rabmé long
I sink into the ‘Swamp of Putrefying Corpses’, and the ‘Pit of Hot Embers’,
narwé nyekhorwa dang gyurwa chen
All in the ‘Neighbouring Hells’ that ring the Hell of Ultimate Torment. And then the changing,
uncertain hells:
go dang kawa tab dang takpa sok
Born in a door, a pillar, a fireplace, a rope and the like,
taktu kol shying chöpé nyitsewa
Always made use of and exploited in these ‘Ephemeral Hells’.
namdrang chobgyé ganglé jungwé gyu
When the cause of being born in any of the eighteen hells—
shyedang drakpö künlong kyepé tsé
Intense hatred and aggression—arises,
lona chö la gyur chik guru khyen
O Guru Rinpoche, turn my mind towards the practice—care for me!
lamgol menpar matong künkhyen jé
Omniscient masters, Longchenpa and Jikme Lingpa, keep me from straying onto the wrong paths!
nyisumé do drinchen lama khyen
Compassionate lama, you who are one with them—care for me!
deshyin pong la nyam migawé yul
Likewise, in a grim and destitute realm
za tung longchö ming yang midrakpar
Where the words, ‘food’, ‘drink’ or ‘comfort’ have never even been heard,
zekom lodar minyé yidak lü
The pretas find nothing to eat or drink for months and years on end. Their bodies
ri ching dangwé tob nyam nampa sum
Are emaciated and they lack even the strength to stand. They suffer from three different kinds
of obscurations,9 and
ganglé jungwé gyu ni serna yin
The reason for being born as one is greed.10
chik la chik za söpé jikpa ché
In constant dread of being killed and eaten by one another,
kol shying chöpé nyamtak langdor mong
Exploited and worked until exhaustion, bewildered as to what to do or not to do,
pata mepé dukngal gyi zirwé
Animals are oppressed by limitless suffering,
sabön timuk münpar khyampa dak
The seed of which is stubborn stupidity—when I wander into its darkness,
lona chö la gyur chik guru khyen
O Guru Rinpoche, turn my mind towards the practice—care for me!
lamgol menpar matong künkhyen jé
Omniscient masters, Longchenpa and Jikme Lingpa, keep me from straying onto the wrong paths!
nyisumé do drinchen lama khyen
Compassionate lama, you who are one with them—care for me!
Invoking the Lama’s Compassion to Avoid Pitfalls on the Path11
a. The Three Yānas
chö lam shyuk kyang nyechö midom shying
Though I have entered the path of the Dharma, I haven’t put a stop to my erring ways.
tekchen gor shyuk shyenpen sem dang dral
Though I have entered the door of the Mahāyāna, I am devoid of any beneficial thought for others.
wang shyi tob kyang kyedzok migompé
Though I have received the four empowerments, I do not practise the development and completion
phases of meditation.
lamgol di lé lamé dral du sol
O lama, free me from straying from the path!
b. View, Meditation and Action
tawa matok tochö chöpa chen
Though I have not realized the View, I act as if ‘a master of crazy wisdom’.
gompa yeng kyang goyul ü gok tak
Though I am distracted in my Meditation, I let myself get stuck in mental gossip and concepts.
chöpa nor kyang rang kyön misempé
Though it’s my own Actions that are at fault, it’s someone else I blame.
chödré di lé lamé dral du sol
O lama, free me from becoming so arrogant and opinionated, so stubborn and insensitive!
c. Distractions of the Present Life
nangpar chi yang né gö nor la sé
Though I may die tomorrow, I am full of craving for home, clothes and possessions.
natsö yol yang ngejung kyoshé dral
Though I am quite old, I’m not mature enough to have the slightest renunciation for saṃsāra.
töpa chung yang yönten chen du lom
Though I have truly heard only a little Dharma teaching, I pride myself on all my knowledge.
marik di lé lamé dral du sol
O lama, free me from such ignorance!
d. The Eight Worldly Concerns
kyen khar chor yang dudzi nekor sem
Though I may be rushing into danger, I go Dharma-socializing in crowds and public places, thinking
I’m on a pilgrimage.
wenpa ten kyang ranggyü shing tar reng
Though going on solitary retreats, my basic character remains as tough as a block of wood.
dulwar ma yang chakdang mashyikpé
Though appearing calm and speaking softly, I haven’t got rid of the attachment and aversion
boiling inside.
chö gyé di lé lamé dral du sol
O lama, free me from these eight worldly concerns!12
nyi tuk di lé nyurdu sé du sol
Quickly rouse me from this deep sleep of ignorance!
trimün di lé nyurdu yung du sol
Quickly set me free from this dismal self-imprisonment!
Calling out to the lama with real fervour, invoke his compassion.
2. Taking Refuge
könchok sum ngö deshek tsawa sum
In the Three Jewels, and their essence, the sugatas, in the three roots: lama, yidam, and khandro,
tsa lung tiklé rangshyin changchub sem
In the channels, inner air, and bindus, and their nature, the bodhicitta,
ngowo rangshyin tukjé kyilkhor la
In the mandala of essence, nature, and compassion,
changchub nyingpö bardu kyab su chi
I take refuge until enlightenment is fully realized.
3 times
3. The Generation of Bodhicitta: the Heart of the Awakened Mind
ho natsok nangwa chudé dzün ri kyi
Ho! Mesmerized by the sheer variety of perceptions, which are like the illusory reflections
of the moon in water,
khorwa lugu gyü du khyampé dro
Beings wander endlessly astray in saṃsāra’s vicious cycle.
rangrig ösal ying su ngalsö chir
In order that they may find comfort and ease in the luminosity and all-pervading space of the
true nature of their minds,
tsemé shyi yi ngang né semkyé do
I generate the immeasurable love, compassion, joy and equanimity of the awakened mind, the heart
of bodhicitta.
3 times
4. Vajrasattva Purification
ah daknyi tamal chiwo ru
Āḥ! I am in my ordinary form. Above my head
pekar dawé den gyi ü
On a white lotus, in the centre of a moon disc seat
hung lé lama dorjé sem
Is hūṃ, which becomes the Lama Vajrasattva:
karsal longchö dzokpé ku
Brilliant white, with complete saṃbhogakāya adornments,
dorjé dril dzin nyemma tril
Holding vajra and bell, and embracing the consort Vajragarvā.13
khyö la kyab sol dikpa jong
I take refuge in you and pray—purify all our negative actions!
gyösem drakpö tol lo shak
With the deepest regret I acknowledge them all and ask your forgiveness:
chinché sok la bab kyang dom
From now on—even if my life is at stake—I shall refrain from indulging in them again.
khyö tuk dawa gyepé teng
In your heart, upon a full moon
hung yik tamar ngak kyi kor
Is the letter hūṃ, encircled by the mantra.
depa ngak kyi gyü kulwé
Reciting the mantra invokes your wisdom mind, and
yabyum dé rol jortsam né
From the point of union of the blissful play of yab-yum
dütsi changchub sem kyi trin
A cloud of bodhicitta nectar
gabur dul tar dzakpa yi
Flows down like a shining stream of milk.14 Through this,
dak dang kham sum semchen gyi
For me and all sentient beings of the three worlds
lé dang nyönmong dukngal gyu
May our negative karma and destructive emotions—the causes of suffering—
nedön dikdrib nyetung drib
Illnesses, harmful influences, negative actions and obscurations, along with wrong doing, downfalls,
and blockages due to breakages of samaya,
malü jangwar dzé du sol
Be purified, till not a single one remains!
om benza sato samaya | manupalaya | benza sato tenopa tishta dridho mé bhava | sutokhayo mé
bhava | supokhayo mé bhava | anurakto mé bhava | sarva siddhi mé prayaccha | sarva karma su
tsa mé | tsittam shreyang | kuru hung | ha ha ha ha ho | bhagavan | sarva tatagata benza
ma mé muntsa benzi bhava maha samaya sato ah
oṃ vajrasattva samayam anupālaya vajrasattva-tvenopa-tiṣṭha dṛḍho me bhava sutoṣyo me
bhava supoṣyo me bhava anurakto me bhava sarva-siddhiṃ me prayaccha sarva-karma śuca me cittaṃ
śreyaṅ-kuru hūṃ ha ha ha ha hoḥ bhagavān sarva-tathāgata-vajra mā me muñca vajrī-bhava
mahā-samaya-sattva āḥ
Recite as many times as possible
gönpo dak ni mishé mongpa yi
O protector! In my ignorance and delusion
damtsik lé ni gal shying nyam
I have gone against and corrupted my samaya.
lama gönpö kyab dzö chik
Lama protector, be my refuge!
tsowo dorjé dzinpa té
Chief of all the maṇḍalas, vajra holder,
tukjé chenpö daknyi chen
Embodiment of great compassion:
drowé tso la dak kyab chi
Chief of all living beings, in you I take refuge!15
ku sung tuk tsawa dang yenlak gi damtsik nyampa tamché tol lo shak so
I confess all my impairments of the root and branch samayas of the body, speech and mind.
dikpa dang dribpa nyetung drimé tsok tamché jang shying dakpar dzé du sol
I implore you: let my negative actions, obscurations, wrong doing and downfalls—all my flaws—be
completely cleansed and purified!
shyé jöpé dorjé sempa gyé shyin dzumpa dang chepé rik kyi bu khyö kyi dik drib nyetung tamché
dakpa yin no
At these words of mine, Vajrasattva is pleased and smiling, says, “Son/daughter of an enlightened
family, your negative actions, obscurations, wrong doing and downfalls are all purified”.
shyé nangwa jin shying ö du shyu né rang la timpé kyen lé
Granting his forgiveness, he melts into light and dissolves into me.
rangnyi kyang dorjé sempa nangtong melong nang gi zuknyen tabur gyurpé tuk sok hung gi tamar
yigé dru shyipo salwa lé özer trö
Through this, I too become Vajrasattva, appearing yet empty, like a reflection in a mirror.
At my heart is hūṃ, around which the four brilliantly radiant syllables oṃ vajra sattva16
emanate rays of light.
kham sum nöchü dang chepa dorsem rik ngé ten dang tenpé rangshyin du sangyé par gyur
Whereby the three worlds—the whole universe of the environment and beings within it—attain enlightenment
all together as the buddha fields and buddhas of the five families of Vajrasattva.
om benza sato hung
oṃ vajrasattva hūṃ
Recite as many times as possible, then rest in meditation.
gewa di yi nyurdu dak
Through the positivity and merit of this, may I swiftly
dorjé sempa drub gyur né
Attain the realization of Vajrasattva, and thereby
drowa chik kyang malüpa
Every single sentient being
dé yi sa la göpar shok
Reach his state of perfection too.
5. The Trikāya Mandala Offering
om ah hung
Oṃ āḥ hūṃ!
a. Nirmāṇakāya Mandala Offering
tongsum jikten jewa trak gyé shying
One billion universes—a hundred times ten million worlds,17
rinchen na dün lhami jorpé tam
Filled with all the wealth of gods and human beings, like the ‘seven precious gems’,18
dak lü longchö chepa yong bul gyi
My bodies, my possessions, and my sources of merit, all together, I offer them in their entirety,
so that
chö kyi khorlö gyurwé si tob shok
I may be born as a nirmāṇakāya and turn the wheel of Dharma, liberating all beings!
b. Saṃbhogakāya Mandala Offering
womin dechen tukpo köpé shying
The highest heaven of great bliss, the realm of ‘Tukpo Köpa’,
ngepa ngaden rik ngé tsombu chen
Perfect with the five certainties,19 the mandala of the five buddha families,
döyön chöpé trinpung samyé pa
And inconceivably vast clouds of offerings of every variety of sensual and emotional stimulants—
pulwé longkü shying la chöpar shok
With this offering, may I enjoy the perfection of the saṃbhogakāya fields!
c. Dharmakāya Mandala Offering
nangsi namdak shyönnu bumpé ku
Where all appearance and existence are completely pure from the very beginning—the youthful
vase body,
tukjé magak chönyi rolpé gyen
Ornamented by the play of dharmatā, unceasing compassion,
ku dang tiklé dzinpa namdak shying
The realm where all clinging to the perception of kāyas and tiklés is naturally liberated—
pulwé chökü shying la chöpar shok
With this wisdom offering, may I enjoy the freedom of the dharmakāya reality!
6. The Accumulation of the Kusulu: Chö
pé  lü chedzin borwé lha dü chom
Phaṭ! By abandoning all attachment to this body held so dear, the demonic forces of seduction
through desire20 are destroyed.
sem tsangpé goné ying la tön
My consciousness shoots out through the ‘aperture of Brahmā’ into all-pervading space, uniting
rigpa with space,
chidak gi dü chom trömar gyur
Destroys the demonic force of death and transforms into Tröma,
yé nyönmong düjom driguk gi
In her right hand, the hooked knife that symbolizes destruction of the demonic force of conflicting
emotions.21
zuk pungpö dü chom töpa drek
Slicing the top off my corpse’s skull, she destroys the demonic force of the aggregates of ego.22
yön le jé tsul gyi bhendha tok
Her left hand holds the skullcup to carry out her activity,
ku sum gyi migö gyebur shyak
Places it on the fireplace of three human heads—representing the three kāyas;
nang tongsum gangwé bamro dé
Inside it is the corpse, now an offering as vast as a billion worlds,
a tung dang hang yik gi dütsir shyu
Melted into nectar by an ‘A stroke’ and haṃ,
dru sum gyi nüpé jang pel gyur
Purified, multiplied and transformed through the power of oṃ āḥ hūṃ.
om ah hung
oṃ āḥ hūṃ
Recite many times
pé  yar chöyul drön gyi tukdam kang
Phaṭ! The guests above—the root and lineage lamas and yidams—by my offering are pleased,
tsok dzok né choktün ngödrub tob
Whereby merit and wisdom are accumulated, and ordinary and supreme siddhis attained.23
mar khorwé drön nyé lenchak jang
The guests below, belonging to saṃsāra, are satisfied by my offering; karmic debts are repaid.
khyepardu nöjé gek rik tsim
In particular, by satisfying malicious and negative forces,
nedön dang barché ying su shyi
All illnesses, destructive influences, and obstacles are pacified, dissolving into all-pervading
space;
kyen ngen dang dakdzin dul du lak
Harmful circumstances and clinging to self are exploded.
tar chöja dang chöyul malü kün
Finally offering, offerer and guests—all
shi dzogpa chenpor machö a
Dissolve into the nature of Dzogpachenpo, the great simplicity: A
Now rest in meditative equipoise.
7. Guru Yoga
a. The Visualization
emaho
Emaho!
rangnang lhündrub dakpa rabjam shying
My entire perception, spontaneously perfect, is a realm of infinite purity,
köpa rabdzok zangdokpalri ü
The ‘Copper Coloured Mountain of Glory’, arrayed in complete and perfect detail. Here, in its
very centre,
rangnyi shyilü dorjé naljorma
My own body is Vajrayoginī,
shyal chik chak nyi mar sal dri tö dzin
With one face and two hands, brilliant red and holding hooked knife and skull,
shyab nyi dortab chen sum namkhar zik
My two feet gracefully poised, my three eyes gazing into the sky.
chiwor pema bum dal nyidé teng
Above my head, on a blossoming hundred thousand-petalled lotus, sun and moon disc seat,
kyabné kündü tsawé lama dang
Inseparable from my own root master, embodiment of all sources of refuge, appears
yermé tsokyé dorjé trulpé ku
Guru Rinpoche, in the supreme nirmāṇakāya form of the ‘Lake-born Vajra’.
kar mar dangden shyönnü shatsuk chen
His body glows with youth, white with a tinge of red.
pökha chögö zaber dungma sol
He wears a gown, monastic shawl, cloak and robe.
shyal chik chak nyi gyalpo rolpé tab
With one face, two hands and seated in royal poise.
chak yé dorjé yönpé tö bum nam
In his right hand he holds the vajra, in his left a skullcup containing the vase of immortality.
u la dabden pemé nyen shyusol
On his head he wears a five-petalled lotus hat.
chenkhung yön na detong yum chokma
Cradled in his left arm he holds the ‘supreme consort’ of bliss and emptiness,
bepé tsul gyi khatam tsesum nam
Concealed as the three-pointed khaṭvāṅga trident.
jazer tiklé öpung long na shyuk
He presides amidst a shimmering aura of rays and rings of rainbow light.
chi khor ö ngé drawé dzepé long
All around him, enveloped in a beautiful lattice of white, blue, yellow, red and green light,
trulpé jebang nyishu tsa nga dang
Are King Trisong Detsen, the twenty-five disciples,
gya bö pendrub rigdzin yidam lha
The paṇḍits, siddhas and vidyādharas of India and Tibet, yidam deities,
khandro chökyong damchen trin tar tib
Ḍākinīs, and dharmapālas and protectors who keep the samaya—all gather like billowing clouds,
saltong nyam né chenpö ngang du sal
Visualized vivid and distinct, in the great equality of clarity and emptiness.
The Seven Line Prayer
hung  orgyen yul gyi nubjang tsam
Hūṃ!  In the north-west of the land of Uḍḍiyāna,
pema gesar dongpo la
In the heart of a lotus flower,
yatsen chok gi ngödrub nyé
Endowed with the most marvellous attainments,
pema jungné shyé su drak
You are renowned as the ‘Lotus Born’,
khor du khandro mangpö kor
Surrounded by many hosts of ḍākinīs.
khyé kyi jesu dak drub kyi
Following in your footsteps,
jingyi lab chir shek su sol
I pray to you: Come, inspire me with your blessing!
guru pema siddhi hung
c. The Seven Branches of Devotional Practice24
hri
Hrīḥ!
i. Prostration
dak lü shying gi dul nyé du
As many times as there are atoms in the universe,
nampar trulpé chaktsal lo
I multiply my body and offer you prostrations.
ii. Offering
ngö sham yitrul tingdzin tü
With both real offerings and those created in the mind through the power of samādhi,
nangsi chöpé chakgyar bul
I offer the entire universe in one vast ‘gesture of offering’.
iii. Confession
go sum migé lé nam kün
All the harmful actions of my body, speech and mind,
ösal chökü ngang du shak
I confess and purify in the luminosity of dharmakāya.
iv. Rejoicing
denpa nyi kyi düpa yi
Whether they be relative or absolute,
gé tsok kün la jé yi rang
I rejoice in all positive, virtuous actions.
v. Imploring the Buddhas to Turn the Wheel of Dharma
rikchen sum gyi dulja la
According to the receptivity and needs of different beings,25
tek sum chökhor korwar kul
I implore you to turn the wheel of Dharma of the three yānas.
vi. Requesting the Buddhas and Teachers to Remain
jisi khorwa matong bar
Till saṃsāra is completely empty, and all beings liberated,
nya ngen mida shyuk soldeb
Do not pass into nirvāṇa, but remain here among us, I pray.
vii. The Dedication of Merit
dü sum sakpé getsa kün
All the merit and positive actions of past, present and future,
changchub chenpö gyu ru ngo
I dedicate so that all beings may attain supreme enlightenment.
d. Maturing the Siddhi
jetsün guru rinpoche
O Guru Rinpoche, Precious One,
khyé ni sangye tamché kyi
You are the embodiment of
tukjé jinlab düpé pal
The compassion and blessing of all the buddhas,
semchen yong kyi gön chikpu
The only protector of beings.
lü dang longchö lo nying drang
My body, my possessions, my heart and soul
töpa mepar khyé la bul
Without hesitation, I surrender to you!
di né changchub matob bar
From now until I attain enlightenment,
kyiduk leknyé to men kün
In happiness or sorrow, in circumstances good or bad, in situations high or low:
jetsün chenpo pejung khyen
I rely on you completely, O Pemajungne, you know me!
om ah hung benza guru pema siddhi hung
oṃ āḥ hūṃ vajra-guru-padma siddhi hūṃ
e. Invoking the Blessing
dak la resa shyen na mé
I have no one else to turn to;
danté dü ngen nyikmé dro
In these evil times, the beings of the Kāliyuga
mizé dukngal dam du jing
Are sinking in a swamp of intense and unbearable suffering.
di lé kyob shik maha guru
Free us from all this, O great Guru!
wang shyi kur chik jinlab chen
Grant us the four empowerments, O blessed one!
tokpa por chik tukjé chen
Direct your realization into our minds, O compassionate one!
drib nyi jong shik nütu chen
Purify our emotional and cognitive obscurations, O powerful one!
om ah hung benza guru pema siddhi hung
oṃ āḥ hūṃ vajra-guru-padma siddhi hūṃ
The Dissolution
namshyik tsé yi dü jé tsé
When my life is at an end,
rangnang ngayab palri shying
With my entire perception the heaven of Ngayab Ling—‘the Glorious Copper Coloured Mountain’,
zungjuk trulpé shyingkham su
The nirmāṇakāya pure land of indivisible appearance and emptiness—
shyilü dorjé naljorma
My body, Vajrayoginī,
sal tser ö kyi gongbu ru
Is transformed into a radiant, shimmering sphere of light
gyur né jetsün pejung dang
And merging, inseparable, with Padmasambhava,
yermé chenpor sangye té
I shall attain buddhahood.
dé dang tongpé chotrul gyi
Then, from the play of vast primordial wisdom,
yeshe chenpö rolpa lé
Which is the miraculous manifestation of bliss and emptiness,
kham sum semchen malüpa
For every single being in the three realms,
drenpé depön dampa ru
Let me appear as their true guide, to lead them to liberation—
jetsün pemé ukyung sol
Jetsün Padma, grant this, I pray!
solwa nying gi kyil né deb
I pray to you from the bottom of my heart,
kha tsam tsik tsam ma yin no
It’s not just words or empty mouthings:
jinlab tuk kyi long né tsol
Grant your blessings from the depth of your wisdom mind,
samdön drubpar dzé du sol
And cause all my good aspirations to be fulfilled, I pray !
om ah hung benza guru pema siddhi hung
oṃ āḥ hūṃ vajra-guru-padma siddhi hūṃ
8. The Lineage Prayer
emaho
Emaho!
gyaché choklhung dralwé shyingkham né
In the heavenly realm, free from all dimensions and extremes,
dangpö sangye chöku kuntuzang
Is the Primordial Buddha, the dharmakāya Samantabhadra;
longku chudé roltsal dorjé sem
His wisdom play, like the reflection of the moon in water, the saṃbhogakāya Vajrasattva;
tulkur tsen dzok garab dorjé la
Perfect with all buddha qualities, nirmāṇakāya Garab Dorje;
solwa deb so jinlab wangkur tsol
To you I pray: Grant me your blessings and empowerment!
shiri singha döndam chö kyi dzö
Śrī Siṃha, treasure of the ultimate Dharma;
jampal shenyen tek gü khorlö gyur
Mañjuśrīmitra, universal ruler of the Nine Yānas;
jnanasutra penchen bimalar
Jñānasūtra, great paṇḍita Vimalamitra;
solwa deb so droljé lam na tön
To you I pray: Show me the way to make my mind free!
dzambuling gi gyen chik pema jung
Padmasambhava, sole ornament of this world of ours,
ngepar tuk kyi sé chok jebang drok
Your supreme heart-disciples, Trisong Detsen, Vairotsana, and Yeshe Tsogyal;
tuk ter gyatsö da drol longchen shyab
Longchenpa, who revealed a vast ocean of wisdom mind treasures;
khandrö ying dzö kabab jikmé ling
Jikme Lingpa, entrusted with the space treasury of the ḍākinīs;
solwa deb so drebu tob drol tsol
To you I pray: Grant me fruition and liberation!
chö kyi dakpo changchub dorjé shyab
Master of the Dharma, Changchub Dorje;26
drubnyé jikmé gyalwé nyugu dang
The siddha, Jikme Gyalwe Nyugu;
trulpé ku chok mingyur namkhé tsen
Supreme among emanations, Mingyur Namkhe Dorje;
gyalwé sepo shyenpen tayé la
Son of the buddhas, Shenpen Thaye;
solwa deb so neluk rang shyal tön
To you I pray: Show me my true nature, my original face!
heruka pal yeshe dorjé dang
Glorious heruka, Do Khyentse Yeshe Dorje;
orgyen jikdral chökyi wangpö shyab
Patrul Rinpoche, Orgyen Jikme Chökyi Wangpo;
drubpé wangchuk pema benza pal
Lord of siddhas, Padma Vajra;
tsokyé lama khyentsé wangpo la
Padmasambhava himself, great Khyentse Wangpo;
solwa deb so choktün ngödrub tsol
To you I pray: Grant me siddhis, ordinary and supreme!
khordé chö kün natsok rang sar drol
Natsok Rangdrol,27 who self-liberated all the phenomena of saṃsāra and nirvāṇa;
künkhyen jikmé tenpé nyima dang
Omniscient Jikme Tenpe Nyima;
kyabné kündü chökyi lodrö la
Embodiment of all sources of refuge, Chökyi Lodrö;
solwa deb so dak gyü jingyi lob
To you I pray: Bless my mind, inspire my understanding!
Prayer for This Life
si lé ngepar jungwé shyenlok gi
Through true renunciation and disgust for saṃsāra,
dorjé lama dönden mik shyin ten
May I rely upon my vajra lama meaningfully, as though he were my very eyes,
chi sung kadrub zabmö nyamlen la
Following his instructions to the letter, and taking to heart the profound practices he gives,
temkyang mepé drub tsuk shyé rü kyi
Not just now and then, but with diligent and constant application,
tukgyü gongpé jinlab powar shok
May I become worthy of the transmission of his profound wisdom mind!
nangsi khordé yené womin shying
Since all that appears and exists, saṃsāra and nirvāṇa, from the very beginning is the Akaniṣṭha
pure realm of the buddhas,
lha ngak chökur dak dzok minpé dré
Where all appearance is liberated into perfect buddha forms; all sounds are purified into mantra;
all thoughts are matured into dharmakāya;
panglang jatsol mepé dzokpa ché
And since Dzogpachenpo is free of any effort of abandoning and adopting,
shenyam yichö lé dé rigpé dang
And since rigpa’s self-radiance is beyond thoughts and experience,
chönyi ngönsum jenpar tongwar shok
May I see the naked reality of dharmatā!
tsenmé tokpa namdrol jazer bub
May all ordinary clinging to reality be totally liberated into rainbow light,
ku dang tiklé nyam nang gong du pel
And the experiences of kāyas and tiklés increase!
riktsal longkü shyingkham tsé la peb
May rigpa’s strength be enhanced, maturing into the fullness of saṃbhogakāya perfection!
chö zé lodé chenpor sangye té
As all perception of phenomenal reality wears out, and the conceptual mind dies into the state
of total enlightenment,
shyönnu bumkur tensi zinpar shok
May I gain the stronghold of the youthful vase body, free from birth and death!
Prayer for the Bardo
shintu naljor nyam ok machü dé
But if I am not able to master the practice of the great Atiyoga in this life,
rak lü dangmé ying su madrol na
And this gross physical body is not liberated into the pure space of the rainbow body,
nam shyik tsé yi dujé tungwé tsé
Then, when the constituents that form this life fall apart—
chiwa ösal kadak chökur shar
At the moment of death may the ground luminosity arise as the dharmakāya, pure from the beginning;
bardö nangcha longchö dzok kur drol
May appearances of the bardo experience be liberated into saṃbhogakāya forms;
trekchö tögal lam gyi tsal dzok né
And, perfecting the path of trekchö and tögal,
mapang bu juk tabur drolwar shok
May I be liberated, as naturally as a child running into its mother’s lap!
Prayer for the Next Life
sang chen ösal tekpa chok gi tsé
In this great secret mantrayāna path of luminosity—Dzogpachenpo—the summit of all,
sangye shyen né mitsol chökü shyal
Enlightenment is to be sought nowhere but in the face of the dharmakāya.
ngön gyur dömé sa la madrol na
If I'm not liberated into the primordial state by actualizing this,
magom sangye chö ngé lam chok la
Then, by taking the sublime path of the five practices of ‘enlightenment without meditation’,28
ten né rangshyin trulpé shying nga dang
May I be born in one of the naturally emanated realms of the five buddha families,29
khyepar pema ö kyi podrang du
And especially in the ‘Palace of Lotus Light’, the Zangdokpalri heaven of Guru Rinpoche,
rigdzin gyatsö tso chok orgyen jé
In the presence of the Lord of Orgyen himself, chief of the ocean of vidyādhara masters,
sang chen chö kyi gatön gyepé sar
While he is celebrating the feast of the great secret mantra Dharma,
sé kyi tuwor kyé né ukyung té
Let me be born as his favourite son or daughter,
tayé drowé nyer tsor dak gyur shok
To take upon myself the task of helping limitless beings!
Prayer of Fulfilment
rigdzin gyalwa gyatsö jinlab dang
Through the inspiration and blessing of the ocean of victorious vidyādharas,
chöying sam mi khyabpé denpa yi
By the truth of the dharmadhātu, beyond conception,
daljor ten la dzok min jang sum gyi
And with this free and well-favoured human form, may I train in the three activities of perfecting,
ripening and purifying,
tendrel ngön gyur sangye tobpar shok
And by actualizing this auspicious interconnection, attain the state of buddhahood!
Pray with total sincerity, and with all your heart.
9. Receiving the Four Empowerments
1. The Vase Empowerment
gurü mintsam né om yik chushel tabur tserwa lé özer trö
From the letter oṃ in the Guru’s30 forehead, radiant and shimmering like moonlight,
rang gi chiwo né shyuk
Rays of light stream out and enter my forehead.
lü kyi lé dang tsé dribpa dak
Negative actions of the body and obscurations of the channels31 are purified.
ku dorjé jinlab shyuk
The blessing of the vajra body of the buddhas infuses me,
bumpé wang tob
The vase empowerment is obtained,
kyerim gyi nö du gyur
I become a receptive vessel for the generation phase of kyerim.
nammin rigdzin gyi sabön teb
The seed of the ‘completely matured vidyādhara’32 is sown.
tulkü gopang tobpé kalwa gyü la shyak
The potential for obtaining the level of nirmāṇakāya is implanted within me.
2. The Secret Empowerment
drinpa né ah yik pema raga tar barwa lé özer trö
From the letter āḥ in his throat, blazing like a ruby,
rang gi drinpa né shyuk
Rays of light streak out and penetrate my throat.
ngak gi lé dang lung gi dribpa dak
Negative activity of the speech33 and obscurations of the inner air are purified,
sung dorjé jinlab shyuk
The blessing of the vajra speech of the buddhas enters me,
sangwé wang tob
The secret empowerment is obtained,
dejö kyi nö du gyur
I become a receptive vessel for mantra recitation practice.
tsewang rigdzin gyi sabön teb
The seed of the ‘vidyādhara with power over life’ is sown.
longchö dzokpé gopang gi kalwa gyü la shyak
The potential for obtaining the level of saṃbhogakāya is implanted within me.
3. The Wisdom Empowerment
tukké hung yik namkhé dokchen lé özer trö
At his heart, from the letter hūṃ, sky-coloured rays of light
rang gi nyingga né shyuk
Pour out and plunge into my heart.
yi kyi lé dang tiklé dribpa dak
Negative activity of the mind and obscurations of the tikle are purified.
tuk dorjé jinlab shyuk
The blessing of the vajra mind of all the buddhas is instilled in me,
sherab yeshe kyi wang tob
The wisdom empowerment is obtained,
detong tsendali nö du gyur
I become a receptive vessel for the caṇḍāli practice of bliss and emptiness.
chakgyé rigdzin gyi sabön teb
The seed of the ‘mahāmudrā vidyādhara’ is sown.
chökü gopang tobpé kalwa gyü la shyak
The potential for obtaining the level of dharmakāya is implanted within me.
4. The Word or Symbolic Empowerment
lar yang tukké hung lé hung yik nyipa shyik karda pangpa shyindu ché
Again, from hūṃ in his heart, a second letter hūṃ bursts out like a shooting star
rangsem dang tadé mepar dré
And merges indistinguishably one with my own mind.
künshyi lé dang shejé dribpa jang
The karma of the ‘ground of all’34 and cognitive obscurations are purified,
yeshe dorjé jinlab shyuk
The blessing of the vajra wisdom pervades me,
tsik gi tsönpa döndam gyi wang tob
The absolute empowerment, symbolized by the word, is obtained.
kadak dzogpa chenpö nö du gyur
I become a receptive vessel for the primordial purity of Dzogpachenpo,
lhündrub rigdzin gyi sabön teb
The seed of the ‘spontaneously accomplished vidyādhara’ is sown.
tartuk gi drebu ngowo nyikü kalwa gyü la shyak go
The potential for the svabhāvikakāya—the final fruition—is implanted within me.
om ah hung benza guru pema siddhi hung
oṃ āḥ hūṃ vajra-guru-padma siddhi hūṃ
Integrating the words that you are reciting with your meditation, receive the empowerments,
one by one.35
lamé tukka né özer marpo drö dang chepa shyik walgyi jungwa daknyi dorjé naljormar salwé nyinggar
rekpa tsam gyi ö mar gyi gongbu shyik tu gyur né guru rinpoche tukkar timpé yermé ro
chik tu gyur
I visualize myself clearly as Vajrayoginī. From the heart-centre of the lama a beam of light,
red and warm, suddenly bursts out and touches my heart. Instantaneously I am transformed
into a sphere of red light the size of a pea, which shoots up towards Padmasambhava, like
a spark that spits from the fire. It dissolves into Guru Rinpoche’s heart, merges and becomes
one with him: one taste.
Imagine this, and then rest in a state of meditation, free from any reference, thought or expression.
When you come out of that state, recite:
palden tsawé lama rinpoche
Glorious root lama, precious one,
dak gi nyinggar pemé den shyuk la
Dwell on the lotus-seat in the depth of my heart,
kadrin chenpö goné jé zung té
Look upon me with the grace of your great compassion,
ku sung tuk kyi ngödrub tsal du sol
Grant me the attainments of body, speech and mind!
palden lamé nampar tarpa la
Towards the lifestyle and activity of the lama,
kechik tsam yang lokta mikyé shying
May wrong view not arise for even an instant, and
chi dzé lekpar tongwé mögü kyi
May I see whatever he does as a teaching for me.
lamé jinlab sem la jukpar shok
Through such devotion, may his blessing inspire and fill my mind!
kyewa küntu yangdak lama dang
In all my lives, may I never be separated from the perfect lama,
dralmé chö kyi pal la longchö né
And having benefited fully from the splendour of the Dharma,
sa dang lam gyi yönten rabdzok té
May I perfect the qualities of the five paths and ten bhūmis,
dorjé chang gi gopang nyur tob shok
And swiftly attain the sublime level of Vajradhara!
10. Dedication
gewa di yi kyewo kün
Through this merit, may all beings
sönam yeshe tsok dzok shing
Complete the accumulations of merit and wisdom,
sönam yeshe lé jungwé
And so attain the dharmakāya and rūpakāya
dampa ku nyi tobpar shok
That come from merit and wisdom.36
dro kün gewa jinyé yöpa dang
Through all the merit that beings have—
jé dang jé gyur deshyin jepa dak
Whatever they have done, will do and are doing now—
zangpo jishyin dendré sa dak la
May they attain the very same stages of perfection
kün kyang künné zangpor rek gyur chik
As Samantabhadra did.
jampal pawö jitar khyenpa dang
Just as the bodhisattva Mañjuśrī knew to be the way,
kuntuzangpo deyang deshyin té
And Samantabhadra too,
dedak kün gyi jesu dak lob ching
I shall follow in the footsteps of all the bodhisattvas,
gewa didak tamché rabtu ngo
And make a perfect dedication of these merits.
dü sum shekpé gyalwa tamché kyi
As all buddhas, past, present and future,
ngowa gangla chok tu ngakpa té
Praise the dedication of merit as supreme,
dak gi gewé tsawa di kün kyang
All my sources of merit I dedicate completely
zangpo chö chir rabtu ngowar gyi
So that all may perfect Samantabhadra’s ‘Good Actions’.37
11. Special Prayer of Aspiration
gangdu kyepé kyewa tamché du
In all my lives, wherever I am born,
tori yönten dünden tobpar shok
May I obtain the seven qualities of birth in higher realms.38
kyé mataktu chö dang tré gyur ching
As soon as I am born, may I meet the Dharma,
tsulshyin drubpé rangwang yöpar shok
And have the freedom to practise it correctly.
der yang lama dampa nyé jé ching
Then, may I please the noble lama,
nyin dang tsen du chö la chöpar shok
And put the Dharma into action day and night.
chö tok né ni nyingpö dön drub té
May I realize the Dharma, actualize its innermost meaning,
tsé der sipé gyatso galwar shok
And so cross the ocean of existence in this very life.
sipar dampé chö rab tönjé ching
May I teach the sacred Dharma to beings wandering in saṃsāra,
shyenpen drub la kyo ngal mepar shok
And never tire or weary of working to help others.
lab chen shyendön chokri mepa yi
Through my vast and impartial service to others,
tamché chamchik sangye tobpar shok
May all beings attain buddhahood together, as one!
This arrangement of the practices to be recited for the Dzogchen Longchen Nyingtik Ngöndro,
The Excellent Path to Omniscience, was written by the tantric yogin Jikme Trinle Özer, who
was nurtured by the kindness of the vidyādhara Jikme Lingpa as well as many other holy teachers,
and attained a firm conviction in the samaya vow. Through this merit, may followers
of this lineage actually see the master as a buddha in person, and may this cause Samantabhadra’s
original face, their own self-cognizant rigpa, to become fully evident to them,
so they become of ceaseless benefit for limitless living beings.
Sarvadā Maṅgalaṃ!

↑ Jikme Trinle Özer pays homage to his master Rigdzin Jikme Lingpa, employing another of his
names—Khyentse Özer—which means ‘light rays of knowledge and love.’↑ In the speech cakra
is the letter hrīḥ, from which a red eight-petalled lotus appears, its roots in the throat,
its petals in the mouth. The front petal forms the tongue, which has become the wisdom of
discernment of Buddha Amitābha. The three spoked vajra symbolizes the mind of all the buddhas,
the red light the buddhas of the five families.↑ The mantras are set anti-clockwise
in concentric circles within the ‘belly’ of the vajra. Innermost are the vowels which are
red; in the middle the consonants which are white; and on the outside the mantra of the Essence
of Interdependent Origination which is blue.↑ At the end of the rays of light appear
thousands of offering goddesses making offerings to all the buddhas, bodhisattvas and buddha
realms.↑ This verse is taken from the Bodhicaryāvatāra, I, 4.↑ This verse is taken from
the Lalitavistara Sūtra.↑ This verse is taken from the Rājāvavādaka Sūtra.↑ This verse
is taken from the Lalitavistara Sūtra.↑ External, internal and specific obscurations. See
The Words of My Perfect Teacher (revised ed.), pp. 72-3.↑ Or miserliness. ‘Because of attachment,
being incapable of enjoying one’s own possessions and other material objects, clinging
to them and being unwilling to part with them or share them with others. It is one of
the twenty secondary negative emotions.’↑ The headings in this section have been adapted
from the commentary by Lobpön Tekchok.↑ The eight samsaric dharmas, or worldly concerns, are
where all one’s actions are governed by: hope for happiness and fear of suffering, hope
for fame and fear of insignificance, hope for praise and fear of blame, hope for gain and
fear of loss; basically attachment and aversion.↑ Although Vajrāṭopā is sometimes given as
the Sanskrit name of Vajrasattva's consort, whose Tibetan name is Dorje Nyemma (rdo rje
snyems ma), it seems that the correct Sanskrit name, which is attested in several extant sources,
is Vajragarvā.↑ Literally, like a cascade of camphor.↑ This famous verse, beginning
with ‘In my ignorance and delusion...’ is frequently recited during confession practices.
Its source is the Abhidhānottaratantra, The Appendix to the Discourse Tantra (D 369, mngon
brjod rgyud bla ma). The Abhidhāna is an ‘appendix’ to the Laghuśaṃvara, The Smaller Śaṃvara
(D 368, bde mchog nyung ngu), the root tantra of Cakrasaṃvara.↑ While in Sanskrit, the
source language of the word, 'vajra' consists of two syllables, in Tibetan the transliterated
'badzra' is written together, without the dot that usually separates individual syllables,
and is therefore counted as only one written "syllable".↑ Literally, ‘A third-order
thousand world system’. See Myriad Worlds, Jamgön Kongtrul Lodro Thaye, Ithaca: Snow Lion
Publications, 1995, pp. 102-3.↑ The seven jewels of royal power (Tib. rgyal srid rin chen
sna bdun; Skt. saptaratna), the attributes of the universal monarch (Cakravartin) are: i)
the precious golden wheel, ii) the precious wish-fulfilling jewel, iii) the precious queen,
iv) the precious minister, v) the precious elephant, vi) the precious horse, and vii)
the precious general (or householder). See Buddhist Symbols, Dagyab Rinpoche, Boston: Wisdom,
1995, pp. 65-83.↑ The five certainties or perfections are the certain or perfect: teacher,
teaching, place, disciples and time.↑ Skt. devaputra.↑ Skt. kleśas.↑ The skandhas.↑ Also,
by offering to the ḍākinīs and protectors, obscurations and obstacles are removed, and
all good wishes and activity enhanced.↑ The seven branches serve as antidotes. Prostration
is the antidote to pride; offering is the antidote to attachment, greed, meanness and poverty;
confession is the antidote to aggression and anger; rejoicing is the antidote to envy
and jealousy; requesting the turning of the Wheel of Dharma is the antidote to ignorance;
requesting the buddhas and teachers to remain is an antidote to wrong views; and dedication
is an antidote to uncertainty and doubts↑ Literally, ‘For the three kinds of beings
to be tamed’. This line was later composed and added by Jamyang Khyentse Wangpo. ‘The three
kinds’ of capacity, ability or receptivity can refer to: śrāvakas, pratyekabuddhas and bodhisattvas,
or the three scopes or kinds of individuals. Gyalse Shenpen Thaye added an alternative
version for this line: གདུལ་བྱའི་ཁམས་དབང་བསམ་པ་བཞིན།, duljé kham wang sampa shyin,
'According to the capacities, faculties and mentalities of different beings.'↑ The following
verses were added in later times to document the specific continuation of this lineage.
They can differ reflecting other lineage transmissions. See Tulku Thondup: Masters of
Meditation and Miracles, p. 333 for lineage trees of the Longchen Nyingtik up to present days.↑
Adzom Drukpa, (1842-1924)↑ Liberation through: seeing cakras, hearing mantras and dhāraṇīs,
tasting nectar, touching the mudrā and remembering the phowa.↑ The five pure realms
are: Ngönpar Gawa (Vajra-East), Paldangdenpa (Ratna-South), Pema Tsekpa (Padma-West), Lerab
Drubpa (Karma-North), and Meri Barwa (Buddha-Centre).↑ Guru Rinpoche, identical to our
own teacher.↑ Skt. nāḍī↑ Also translated as ‘vidyādhara with residue’.↑ Skt. prāṇa↑ The ground
of all or universal ground (Tib. kun gzhi; Skt. ālaya. Tulku Thondup, in Enlightened
Journey, Boston: Shambhala, 1995, p.207, writes, ‘the karma of the universal ground is the
karma that is stored in the universal ground or according to Khenpo Ngagchung, it is the
karmas created by the consciousness of the universal ground, which has dualistic concepts
(an intellectual obscuration) with traces.’↑ Dilgo Khyentse Rinpoche says: ‘Through the blessing
of the Guru, our body, speech and mind and the Guru’s enlightened body, speech and
mind will become indistinguishably one. Here, we simply remain in equipoise, within the state
of emptiness and pure awareness.’ According to Jamyang Khyentse Chökyi Lodrö, if we cannot
rest fully in that state at this point, we can recite the Vajra Guru mantra.↑ This verse
is from Nāgārjuna’s Sixty Stanzas of Reasoning (Yuktiṣaṣṭikākārika in Sanskrit). The
following verse comes from the Avataṃsaka Sūtra.↑ These two famous verses come from Samantabhadra’s
Aspiration to Good Actions—the King of Aspiration Prayers, the Ārya Bhadrā Carya
Praṇidhāna Rāja, which is the final part of the Gaṇḍavyūha Sūtra, the last section of the
Avataṃsaka Sūtra.↑ The seven qualities of birth in higher realms are: long life, freedom
from ill-health, a beautiful form, good fortune, high birth, great riches, and great wisdom.
This final prayer is by Longchen Rabjam.