The Excellent Path to Perfect Liberation
A Guidance Practice (Nedren) for the Dukngal Rangdrol (Natural Liberation of Suffering) Practice
of the Great Compassionate One from the Longchen Nyingtik
by Dodrupchen Jigme Trinle Özer

namo guru lokeśvarāya
Embodiment of the love of all the buddhas, Avalokiteśvara,Inseparable from whom was the divine
Khyentse, wisdom and love,Remain in the centre of my heart, upon the lotus of devotion,Without
ever parting, and grant your blessings, I pray!

So that the deceased may find relief from the cities of the six realms,And reach the level of
Great Bliss and liberation,I shall set out the supreme practice of the Excellent Path to
Perfect Liberation—May Padmapāṇi, the Holder of the Lotus, grant his blessing!

For this, first perform the practice of Dukngal Rangdrol ordinarily, reciting the mantra and
praise. Then, establish the six sages and the six seed syllables in the mandala, and arrange
substances for purification, six tormas for the karmic debts of the six realms, an ablution
vase, and empowerment materials. They should all be well laid out. The ‘name card’ of
the deceased and substances to dedicate as food, should also be arranged, with nothing missing.
Then, out of a state of loving kindness, recite the following:
hrih, daknyi tukjé chenpö kur salwé
Hrīḥ. I appear clearly in the form of the Great Compassionate One.
tukké hrih lé özer rab tröpé
In my heart is the syllable Hrīḥ, from which there emanate rays of light,
tsedé namshé jikten dünpö yul
Summoning the consciousness of the deceased, from the seven realms
gangla né kyang kuk té zuk la tim
Or wherever it may reside, so that it dissolves into this form.
Consider this and summon the consciousness through the force of undistracted samādhi.
namo, chok sum tsa sum kündü tukjé lha
Namo! Deity of compassion, embodiment of the Three Jewels and Three Roots,
dukngal rangdrol chenrezik wang gi
Lord Avalokiteśvara, Natural Liberation of Suffering,
denpé tob kyi tsedé namshé deh
Through the power of your truth, may the consciousness of the deceased
nyurwa nyi du tsenjang di la khuk
Be brought swiftly into this tsenjang1!
om mani padmé hung hrih
oṃ maṇi padme hūṃ hrīḥ
tsé lé depa am ku sha ya dza dza
Three times
Then, gently, in the presence of the deceased, recite the following:
hrih, dinang lé tal tsedé khyö nyön chik
Hrīḥ. You who have died and passed beyond, now listen well!
rik druk gar kyé dukngal dzin tri né
Wherever you are reborn among the six classes, it will only be a place of suffering.
dé lé dön chir zuk ming yi chak dzé
To escape, remain securely in this material support for the three doors—
go sum tendzé di la tenpar shyuk
A form and name to which you are attached.
nrih dza hung bam ho tishtentu
ṇrīḥ jaḥ hūṃ baṃ hoḥ tiṣṭhantu
Recite this to secure the abiding. Then, consider that you explain the Dharma to the deceased
who listens.
First, you need to cleanse, purify and bless the gektor.
hrih, khorwar khor tsé lenchak shakhön gyü
Hrīḥ. All you who are brought into being through karmic debt and enmity in saṃsāra,
kyepé za dré shi shé sokchö dang
All you demons and executioners,
uk len shin du dzuwé rik nam kün
All you murderous spirits who prey on vital breath and steal the life force,
lü di long la shyendu deng shik phat
Take this ransom offering and go elsewhere!
Take a wrathful torma outside, and recite the mantra of the Four Hūṃs and the 35-syllable wrathful
mantra:
om sumbhani sumbhani hung | grihana grihana hung | grihanapaya grihanapaya hung | anaya ho |
bhagawan bidyaraza krodha hung pé
oṃ sumbha(ni) sumbhani hūṃ | gṛhṇa gṛhṇa hūṃ | gṛhṇāpaya gṛhṇapāya hūṃ | ānaya ho bhagavān vidyārāja
hūṃ phaṭ
om gha gha ghataya ghataya sarva dushtam hung pé | kilaya kilaya sarvapapam pé | hung hung hung
benza kilaya benza dharoda ajna payati sarva bighanen kaya waka tsitta benza kilaya hung
pé
oṃ gha gha ghātaya ghātaya sarva duṣṭān hūṃ phaṭ | kīlaya kīlaya sarvapāpān phaṭ | hūṃ hūṃ hūṃ
vajra kīlaya vajradharodājñāpayati sarva vīghnan kāya vāk cittaṃ vajra kīlaya hūṃ phaṭ
Then:
za dré shi shé tamché utsentaya maraya phat
Recite this and consider that deadly spirits have departed.
Request the deceased to recite the following while expressing respect through body, speech and
mind, and pray with focus:
ho, kyabné kündü lama chenrezik
Ho. Embodiment of all sources of refuge, Guru Avalokiteśvara,
kyabmé dak sok tukjé kyab tu sol
Through your compassion, protect those like me, who lack protection!
rik druk khorwé dukngal gyatso lé
Free us from the ocean of suffering in saṃsāra’s six realms!
dral né tarpé kam sar drang du sol
And lead us safely to the dry shores of liberation!
Repeat this three times. Then the lama says:
hung, nyön chik tsedé rik kyi bu
Hūṃ! Listen, son or daughter of noble family, you who have departed this life,
tob ké milü tob lak kyang
Although you gained a human body so difficult to find,
mi tak chiwa wang tsenpé
Through the unrelenting force of impermanence and death
namshé parol né su khyam
Your consciousness now wanders in another place.
düjé zukpung shul du lü
And your composite physical form has been left behind.
lé ngen bakchak lung gi drib
Buffeted by the winds of negative karma and habitual patterns,
karnak nammin ngön né guk
You are propelled by the ripening of pure and impure deeds,
shinjé ponyé wangmé tri
Led helplessly by the messengers of Yama, Lord of Death
mindö ngensong ling sum nyok
To the unwelcome destination of the three lower realms,
dukngal zö ka yarenga
Where suffering is so terribly hard to bear!
dedak rang jé lé dré yin
These are the results of what you have done yourself.
dön la trulnang tu tepé
But know that in reality what appears to deluded perception,
toyor mi dang tak trar drul
Is like a heap of stones in the distance or a coloured rope,
trul ngor nang shyin shé dzö la
And recognize it as it appears.
rangrig yengmé ngang nyi lé
From your own natural awareness, beyond distraction,
lha dang lamar solwa tob
Pray to the deity and the lama!
Recite this three times, considering that the deceased recites it too.
Then there is the ablution for the tsenjang:
hung, di ni jam dang tsewé trul
Hūṃ. Through the flowing water of the nirmāṇakāya’s manifest display,
tulkü roltsal chugyün gyi
The expression of loving kindness and affection,
khyö kyi pung kham kyemché kyi
May all the impurity and obscurations of your
ma dak drib tsok dak gyur chik
Aggregates, elements and sense-sources be cleansed and purified!
om mani padmé hung
oṃ maṇi padme hūṃ
tsedé kyi tsé khorwa tokma mepa né dü sum küntu lü kyi goné sakpé dikdrib tamché sarva shuddhé
shuddhé soha
Let all the harmful actions and obscurations accumulated with the body throughout all the deceased’s
countless lifetimes in the past, present and future throughout beginningless saṃsāra,
all be purified! Sarva śuddhe śuddhe svāhā!
hung, di ni lhündrub ying nang tsal
Hūṃ. Through the flowing water of the unceasing saṃbhogakāya,
gakmé longkü chugyün gyi
The expression of the spontaneously perfect, all-pervading space,
khyö kyi namshé tsok gyé kyi
May all the impurity and obscurations of your
ma dak drib tsok dak gyur chik
Eight consciousnesses be cleansed and purified!
om mani padmé hung hrih
oṃ maṇi padme hūṃ hrīḥ
om hung tram hrih ah
oṃ hūṃ trāṃ hrīḥ āḥ
tsedé kyi tsé khorwa tokma mepa né dü sum küntu ngak gi goné sakpé dikdrib tamché sarva shuddhé
shuddhé soha
Let all the harmful actions and obscurations accumulated with the speech throughout all the
deceased’s countless lifetimes in the past, present and future throughout beginningless saṃsāra,
all be purified! Sarva shuddhe shuddhe svaha!
hung, di ni kadak trödral dang
Hūṃ. Through the flowing water of the youthful vase body,
shyönnu bumkü chugyün gyi
The radiance of primordial purity beyond conceptual elaboration,
khyö kyi lhenkyé küntak kyi
May all impurities and obscurations,
ma dak drib tsok dak gyur chik
Both innate and acquired, be cleansed and purified!
om mani padmé hung hrih | buddha jnana dharma dhatu ah
oṃ maṇi padme hūṃ hrīḥ | buddha jñāna dharmadhātu āḥ
tsedé kyi tsé khorwa tokma mepa né dü sum küntu yi kyi goné sakpé dikdrib tamché sarva shuddhé
shuddhé soha
Let all the harmful actions and obscurations accumulated with the mind throughout all the deceased’s
countless lifetimes in the past, present and future throughout beginningless saṃsāra,
all be purified! Sarva shuddhe shuddhe svaha!
Recite the mantras three times in this way, and cleanse with the water of the activity vase
(lébum).
Then there is the expelling of the poisons:
hung, marik tsalnang ö ngapo
Hūṃ. The five-coloured light that is the expression of ignorance,
dakgir zung la rab tepé
By solidifying that which is clung to as mine,
chinang jungwa nga trak zung
The outer and inner five elements
duk ngé kyemché kyeyul gyi
Are like the mother and father who create
pama jishyin gyurpé duk
The objects which give rise to the five poisons.
lha ngak tingdzin roltsal gyi
May this poison be expelled through the powerful play of deity, mantra and samādhi,
duk chung duk ngé drib tsok kün
And all the obscurations of the five poisons
jungwa sosö ying su dak
Be purified in the space of each respective element,
duk dzin kha tar tong gyur chik
So that any clinging to the poisons is eliminated and left like empty space!
Scatter flour. And add the following to the end of the six syllable mantra:
tsedé kyi tsé khorwa tokma mepa né dü sum küntu duk ngé goné sakpé dikdrib tamché sarva shuddhé
shuddhé soha
Let all the harmful actions and obscurations accumulated by means of the five poisons throughout
all the deceased’s countless lifetimes in the past, present and future throughout beginningless
saṃsāra, all be purified! Sarva shuddhe shuddhe svaha!
The three ablution mantras above and the mantra for purifying the poisons given here should
each be recited three times at the appropriate juncture.
Then there is the guidance practice of the six realms. For this, the tsenjang must be moved
up at the various phases, and the six tormas should be set out and offered in the proper sequence.
1. Purifying the Hells
hung, döpé yönten ngaden pé
Hūṃ. This torma, complete with all the qualities that delight the senses,
torma khogu püntsok ter
A perfect treasure of all that is desirable,
tsedé shyedang lé sakpé
I dedicate in order to purify all the karmic debts and enmity
lenchak shakhön jang chir ngo
The deceased has accumulated and provoked through anger.
namah sarva tathagata avalokité om sambhara sambhara hung
Reciting this, dedicate the torma and immediately bestow the empowerment of the sage of the
hells:
hung, shyedang namdak drodul trulpé ku
Hūṃ. Nirmāṇakāya tamer of beings, anger’s utter purity,
nyalwé tubpa mé chü chaktsen nam
Sage of the hells, holding fire and water as your emblems—
tsedé rik kyi bu la wangkurwé
By granting empowerment to the deceased, this child of noble family,
mi kyö dorjé sang sum wang tob shok
May he/she gain the power of the secret body, speech and mind of Vajra Akṣobhya!
om muneyé soha | om daha daha sarva narak gaté hetün hung phat
Reciting this, consider that the mind of the deceased merges with your own mind and the hell
realms are emptied from their very depths.
hung, nyön chik tsedé lü jé rik kyi bu
Hūṃ. Listen, deceased one, you who have left the body, child of noble family,
semnyi dakmé dak tu zung kyön dang
Through the fault of clinging to a self in the selfless nature of the mind,
nangwa shyenmé shyen zung dang shyen dré
And an ‘other’ in appearances which are devoid of any other,
tsadrang nyalwé nöchü shyé ré jik
Arises the terrifying inner and outer world—the environment and beings—of the hot and cold hells.
dön la rangsem trulpa yinpé chir
In reality, as this is but the delusion of your very own mind,
trulnang milam sepé nekab tar
Know it to be deluded experience,
shepar gyi la nyal né pangwar dzö
And, like waking from a dream, abandon these infernal realms!
Recite this, transfer the tsenjang, and cast out the gektor.
2. Purifying the Preta Realm
hung, döpé yönten ngaden pé
Hūṃ. This torma, complete with all the qualities that delight the senses,
torma khogu püntsok ter
A perfect treasure of all that is desirable,
tsedé serné lé sakpé
I dedicate in order to purify all the karmic debts and enmity
lenchak shakhön jang chir ngo
The deceased has accumulated and provoked through greed.
namah sarva tathagata avalokité om sambhara sambhara hung
namaḥ sarva tathāgata avalokite oṃ sambhara sambhara hūṃ
With this, dedicate the torma. Then, for the empowerment of ‘blazing mouth’ recite:
hung, serna namdak drodul trulpé ku
Hūṃ. Nirmāṇakāya tamer of beings, the utter purity of greed,
yidak tubpa drom bü chaktsen chen
Sage of the pretas, holding a casket as your emblem—
tsedé rik kyi bu la wangkurwé
By granting empowerment to the deceased, this child of noble family,
nangwa tayé sang sum wang tob shok
May he/she gain the power of the secret body, speech and mind of Amitābha!
om muné ksham soha | om pa tsapa tsa sarva pretaka gaté hé tün hung phat
Recite this and consider that the preta realms are emptied from their very depths.
hung, nyön chik tsedé lü jé rik kyi bu
Hūṃ. Listen, deceased one, you who have left the body, child of noble family,
dakmé nam nyi ma tok trul wang gi
Through the delusion of not recognizing the two forms of selflessness,
serné lé sak yidak yul du kyé
You accumulate deeds out of greed and are reborn in the preta realm,
trekom dukngal zö ka yarenga
Afflicted by the unbearable sufferings of hunger and thirst,
deyang milam kab tar shé dzö la
Know this to be just like a dream!
tré té yul pong tarlam shyingkham nyok
Abandon the land of the pretas and seek instead the path to liberation and pure realms!
Recite this, transfer the tsenjang, and cast out the gektor.
3. Purifying the Animal Realm
hung, döpé yönten ngaden pé
Hūṃ. This torma, complete with all the qualities that delight the senses,
torma khogu püntsok ter
A perfect treasure of all that is desirable,
tsedé kolchö lé sakpé
I dedicate in order to purify all the karmic debts and enmity
lenchak shakhön jang chir ngo
The deceased has accumulated and provoked through stupidity.
namah sarva tathagata avalokité om sambhara sambhara hung
With this, dedicate the torma. Then, for the empowerment of the sage of the animals recite:
hung, timuk namdak drodul trulpé ku
Hūṃ. Nirmāṇakāya tamer of beings, stupidity’s utter purity,
düdrö tubpa poti chaktsen chen
Sage of the animals, holding a volume of  the scriptures—
tsedé rik kyi bu la wangkurwé
By granting empowerment to the deceased, this child of noble family,
nampar nang dzé sang sum wang tob shok
May he/she gain the power of the secret body, speech and mind of Vairocana!
om muné drem soha | om ma ta ma ta sarva tiryaka gaté hung phat
Recite this and consider that the animal realms are emptied from their very depths.
hung, nyön chik tsedé lü jé rik kyi bu
Hūṃ. Listen, deceased one, you who have left the body, child of noble family,
rang ngoma shé mongpé lé wang gi
Through the karma of ignorance, not recognizing your own nature,
jolsong yul kyé timuk lé la chö
You will be born among the animals and experience dullness of mind,
kolchö dukngal zö ka bakré drang
And the unbearable sufferings of servitude and exploitation.
deyang tak trar drul dzin lé dok tar
Now, as if turning away from the perception of a coloured rope as a snake,
düdrö yul pong yangdak lam du shok
Abandon the animal realm and take up the genuine path!
Recite this, transfer the tsenjang, and cast out the gektor.
4. Purifying the Asura Realm
hung, döpé yönten ngaden pé
Hūṃ. This torma, complete with all the qualities that delight the senses,
torma khogu püntsok ter
A perfect treasure of all that is desirable,
tsedé tabtsö lé sakpé
I dedicate in order to purify
lenchak shakhön jang chir ngo
All the karmic debts and enmity the deceased has accumulated and provoked through rivalry.
namah sarva tathagata avalokité om sambhara sambhara hung
namaḥ sarva tathāgata avalokite oṃ sambhara sambhara hūṃ
With this, dedicate the torma. Then, for the empowerment of the sage of the asuras recite:
hung, trakdok namdak drodul trulpé ku
Hūṃ. Nirmāṇakāya tamer of beings, jealousy’s utter purity,
lhamin tubpa raldri gocha dzin
Sage of the asuras, bearing sword and armour—
tsedé rik kyi bu la wangkurwé
By granting empowerment to the deceased, this child of noble family,
dönyö drubpé sang sum wang tob shok
May he/she gain the power of the secret body, speech and mind of Amoghasiddhi!
om muné srum soha | om biden khata kha tsindha tsindha hung phat
Recite this and consider that the asura realms are emptied from their very depths.
hung, nyön chik tsedé lü jé rik kyi bu
Hūṃ. Listen, deceased one, you who have left the body, child of noble family,
lhenkyé küntak tu té gyukyen gyi
Based on the fully developed forms of ignorance, both innate and acquired,
trakdok khöndzin lé kyi pangpé dro
Acting out of jealousy and rivalry creates karma that impels beings,
lhamin yul kyé tabtsö zö ka yang
So that they take birth in the asura realm, where conflict is unbearable.
lakhé toyor mir trul sangpa shyin
Now, as if clearing away the mistaken perception of a heap of stones as a man,
lhamin yul pang namdak shyingkham nyok
Abandon the asura realm, and seek instead the heavenly realms of total purity!
Recite this, transfer the tsenjang, and cast out the gektor.
5. Purifying the Deva Realm
hung, döpé yönten ngaden pé
Hūṃ. This torma, complete with all the qualities that delight the senses,
torma khogu püntsok ter
A perfect treasure of all that is desirable,
tsedé ngagyal lé sakpé
I dedicate in order to purify all the karmic debts and enmity
lenchak shakhön jang chir ngo
The deceased has accumulated and provoked through pride.
namah sarva tathagata avalokité sambhara sambhara sambhara hung
namaḥ sarva tathāgata avalokite oṃ sambhara sambhara hūṃ
With this, dedicate the torma. Then, for the empowerment of the sage of the devas recite:
hung, ngagyal namdak drodul trulpé ku
Hūṃ. Nirmāṇakāya tamer of beings, the utter purity of pride,
lha yi tubpa piwang chaktsen chen
Sage of the devas, holding a vina as your emblem—
tsedé rik kyi bu la wangkurwé
By granting empowerment to the deceased, this child of noble family,
rinchen jungden sang sum wang tob shok
May he/she gain the power of the secret body, speech and mind of Ratnasambhava!
om muné trem soha | om sarva sukha sarva karma tsindha tsindha hung phat soha
Recite this and consider that the deva realms are emptied from their very depths.
hung, nyön chik tsedé lü jé rik kyi bu
Hūṃ. Listen, deceased one, you who have left the body, child of noble family,
künshyi namshé shyenwang gyurpa yi
Through the power of being influenced by the all-ground consciousness,
ngagyal khengsem lé la chö dré kyi
And carrying out actions based on pride and arrogance,
lha yul kyé né po tung lasok kyi
You will be born in the deva realm and suffer the unbearable torment
dukngal nakpar ka yang gyumé trul
Of death and transmigration and the like,
shyik té lha yul dzinpa bong dzö la
So, as if dispelling an illusion, abandon the deva realm!
namkhyen yangdak lam du dongpar gyi
And take up the genuine path leading to omniscience!
Recite this, transfer the tsenjang, and cast out the gektor.
6. Purifying the Human Realm
hung, döpé yönten ngaden pé
Hūṃ. This torma, complete with all the qualities that delight the senses,
torma khogu püntsok ter
A perfect treasure of all that is desirable,
tsedé duk nga chi dang ni
I dedicate in order to purify all the karmic debts and enmity
khyepar döchak lé sakpé
The deceased has accumulated and provoked through the five poisons in general,
lenchak shakhön jang chir ngo
And especially through desire.
namah sarva tathagata avalokité om sambhara sambhara hung
namaḥ sarva tathāgata avalokite oṃ sambhara sambhara hūṃ
With this, dedicate the torma. Then, for the empowerment of the sage of the Śākyas recite:
hung, döchak namdak drodul trulpé ku
Hūṃ. Nirmāṇakāya tamer of beings, jealousy’s utter purity,
mi yi tubpa sek shang lhungzé nam
Sage of the human beings, holding the mendicant’s staff and alms bowl—
tsedé rik kyi bu la wangkurwé
By granting empowerment to the deceased, this child of noble family,
tukjé chenpö sang sum wang tob shok
May he/she gain the power of the secret body, speech and mind of the Great Compassionate One!
om muné sum soha | om nri bi sha mu sha tsindha tsindha hung phat
Recite this and consider that the human realms are emptied from their very depths.
hung, nyön chik tsedé lü jé rik kyi bu
Hūṃ. Listen, deceased one, you who have left the body, child of noble family,
go ngé namshé yul ngé jé drangwé
As a result of the five sensory consciousnesses pursuing objects of the senses,
tsok druk yul la chakdang jé dré kyi
And generating attachment and aversion for the six sense objects,
miyul kyé né dukngal chuchik la
You will be born in the human realm and constantly undergo the eleven types of suffering, so
difficult to bear.
taktu chöpa zö ké né yin kyang
Instead, by realizing that this is like seeing your own shadow
rang drib tong tsé denyi drar zungwa
And taking it for an enemy,
jishyin tok tar ngardzin pong dzö la
Abandon clinging to self,
chak na pemé gosar lebpar shok
And arrive at the level of Padmapāṇi!
Then, when bestowing empowerment on the deceased, the eight branch practice is as follows:
namo, chok sum tsa sum ngowo nyi
Namo. Actual embodiments of the Three Jewels and Three Roots,
dukngal rangdrol lhatsok la
Deities of the Natural Liberation of Suffering,
chaktsal kyab chi nyé tsok shak
To you I prostrate! In you I take refuge! To you I confess all faults!
chö tsok kün bul chökhor kor
I make offerings and implore you to turn the Dharma Wheel,
getsar yi rang takten shyuk
I rejoice in all sources of virtue and beseech you to remain.
sönam dro la pen chir ngo
And I dedicate all merit for the benefit of beings.
Recite this and consider that the deceased appears clearly at the eastern gate of the mandala,
on an eight-petalled lotus upon a raised platform. Attach the blindfold and recite this
mantra:
om tsakshu bhenda wa rama na yé soha
With this mantra, you cast the flower.
om a kham wi ra hung
om, rangnang namdak womin shying
Om. In the Akaniṣṭha pure land that is the inherent purity of my own perception,
dukngal rangdrol podrang dir
Within the palace of the Natural Liberation of Suffering
dak ni minpar tsal lak na
As I request the ripening of empowerment,
tukjé chenpö dak kyab dzö
May the Great Compassionate One be my refuge!
Pray like this three times and open the doors to the mandala.
hung, dön gyi womin go kyongwa
Hūṃ. Guardians of the doors to the ultimate Akaniṣṭha,
tsemé shyiden lhashyi po
Four deities who possess the four boundless qualities,
tukjé semchen dön dzé chir
So that you may work for beings’ welfare,
yeshe chenpö go ché shik
Let the doors to great wisdom be opened!
Recite this, and consider that the deceased repeats the following with the aspiration to meet
the deities face to face:
chok chü gyalwa sé ché kyi
Embodiment of all the buddhas of the ten directions and their heirs,
chizuk pakchok tukjé ter
Sublime and noble Avalokiteśvara, treasury of compassion,
dukngal rangdrol kyilkhor lhar
Natural Liberation of Suffering—in the deities of this mandala,
dak nigü pé kyab su chi
With devotion I take refuge.
genyen getsul gelong dang
All the vows and commitments of the lay practitioner, monk or nun,
changsem ngak kyi lab dom rik
And of the bodhisattva and the mantra practitioner—
malü dak gi yongsu zung
All of them, without exception, I shall uphold.
Recite this three times and then invoke the wisdom deities:
tsé lé depa kechik gi
In a single instant the deceased appears clearly
pakpé kur sal né sum du
In the form of the noble Avalokiteśvara,
yikdru sum gyi tsenpa lé
With three syllables at the three centres,
ö trö yeshe lha yi tsok
From which light radiates out,
chendrang shinpo lhar salwar
Invoking the hosts of wisdom deities, who dissolve into the deceased in deity form,
yermé duma ro chik gyur
And become inseparable, of a single taste.
To the end of the six-syllable mantra add the following:
arya lokeshvara jnana benza abeshaya a a
For the descent of the wisdom deities and ensuring their stable presence, recite tistha benza
etc.
Then, casting the flower on the mandala:
hung, tendrel dzé kyi metok di
Hūṃ. This flower of auspicious substance
kyilkhor lha la bul lak na
Is offered to the deities of the mandala.
ngön né letro gang yöpé
May it fall on the special deities with whom
lhakpé lha der babpar shok
There is a karmic connection from the past!
pupé pratitsa ho
Confer a name corresponding to whichever deity the flower fell upon, and then perform the ‘opening
of the eyes’:
hung, mik dar marik ling tok tsön
Hūṃ. The blindfold represents the cataracts of ignorance.
tukjé chenpö ser tur gyi
Through the golden utensil of great compassion,
yeshe chen du yé gyi na
Let the eyes of wisdom be opened,
rangjung lha shyaljalwar shok
So that the face of the naturally arising deity is encountered!
jnana tsakshu prabeshaya phat
Then the deity’s face is revealed:
hung, nyön chik kalden rik kyi bu
Hūṃ. Listen! Fortunate child of noble family,
tö shik dün gyi dal la tö
Look! Look at the mandala before you!
tsenma dzé kyi kyilkhor di
This mandala of material substance
womin trulpé shyingkham té
Is the nirmāṇakāya pure land of Akaniṣṭha,
tukjé chenpö kyilkhor yin
The mandala of the Great Compassionate One.
dön la rangsem matrulpé
In reality, it is the essence, nature and compassionate energy
ngowo rangshyin tukjé sum
Of your own undeluded mind,
tukjé chenpor lhün gyi drub
Spontaneously present as the Great Compassionate Avalokiteśvara.
dé matokpé yidam lha
Know that there is no other yidam deity
lok namé dön shepar dzö
Aside from this realization.
om mani padmé hung hrih | a a ah
oṃ maṇi padme hūṃ hrīḥ | a a aḥ
Recite this and remain in meditative equipoise without distraction.
1. The Vase Empowerment
om, chitar bumpa nöchü den
Oṃ. Outwardly the vase and its contents,
nangtar chak na pemo yi
Inwardly the flowing nectar of the compassion
tukjé dütsi chugyün gyi
Of Padmapāṇi, the Holder of the Lotus—
tsedé lü la wangkurwé
By bestowing this empowerment on the body of the deceased,
trulpé ku ru minpar shok
May it ripen as the nirmāṇakāya!
Add the following to the root mantra and recite it:
...kaya abhikintsa om
2. The Mantra Empowerment of Enlightened Speech
ah, chitar sa chu mé lung dra
Āḥ. Outwardly the sound of earth, water, fire and wind,
nangtar drowa rik druk ké
Inwardly the languages of the six classes of beings,
sangwa gyal kün sung sang dön
Secretly the secret speech of all the buddhas,
yigé dünpar düpé wang
The empowerment that is contained within the seven syllables—
tsedé ngak la wangkurwé
By bestowing this empowerment on the speech of the deceased,
longchö dzok kur minpar shok
May it ripen as the saṃbhogakāya!
Add the following to the root mantra and recite it:
...waka abhikintsa ah
3. The Vajra Empowerment of Enlightened Mind
hung, tsenma dzé kyi dorjé di
Hūṃ. This material substance of the vajra
gyal kün tuk kyi tsönjé dé
Symbolizes the enlightened mind of all the buddhas—
tsedé sem la wangkurwé
By bestowing this empowerment on the mind of the deceased,
chö kyi ku ru minpar shok
May it ripen as the dharmakāya!
Add the following to the root mantra and recite it:
...tsitta abhikintsa hung
Following the completion of the empowerment, dedicate sensual delights and food in the following
way:
dündu rinpoche yi nö
Before you, in a precious vessel
yang shing gyaché drang denpé
Vast and expansive, are all manner of foodstuffs
nang du lha dang mi sok kyi
Numerous enough to be eaten
zacha dak shyib lasok zé
By gods, human beings and the rest,
ja chang o shyo lasok kom
As well as tea, alcohol, milk, curd and other forms of drink—
dzemé yishyin ter du gyur
An inexhaustible treasury fulfilling each and every wish.
Reciting the sky-treasury mantra and performing the mudrā, bless the substances three times
and dedicate them in the following manner:
hung, khazé ro chok gya denpé
Hūṃ. Supremely delicious food with a hundred flavours,
zawé zé dang tungwé kom
The very best of food and drink,
gowé gö dang yojé dzé
The finest clothes to wear and material things,
mizé ter du jinlab né
Are all blessed as an inexhaustible treasure
tsedé khyö la ngöpa yi
And dedicated to you, the deceased.
wangpo druk dang rab tünpé
Through this, may you gain a perfect treasure of delight,
sosö longchö püntsok ter
Perfectly suited to every sensory desire,
ngöpa jishyin tob gyur né
Just as I have dedicated.
tral du ga dé rö tsim shying
May you be satisfied by the experience of happiness and bliss,
tartuk namdak sar chö shok
And ultimately arrive at the state of total purity!
Reciting this, send out the burnt offerings (sur) and liquid offerings.
To the physical support visualized as the deity, perform the offering:
hung, pung kham kyemché wang yul ché
Hūṃ. To the deities of the mandala of the three seats,
den sum tsangwé kyilkhor lhar
Together with the objects, aggregates, elements and sense-sources,
yön du bul lo yong shyé né
We offer these gifts—accept them all!
tsok dzok drib jang ku nga yi
May the accumulations be perfected and the obscurations purified!
pal la longchö tu tob shok
And may you gain the power to enjoy the splendour of the five kāyas!
Having lit a butter lamp, recite:
hung, yeshe ngaden drönmé di
Hūṃ. May this lamp of the five wisdoms—
ngowo tong kyang rangshyin sal
Empty in essence, yet by nature clear,
tukjé tsalshuk magakpé
And the expressive power of its compassion unceasing—
tsedé marik münpé mak
Dispel the thick darkness of ignorance in the deceased,
sal né ku sum shying tong shok
So that he/she may see the realms of the three kāyas!
The Transference
hung, tsedé bu khyö lekpar nyön
Hūṃ! Deceased one, son or daughter of noble family, listen well!
chok men khorwé né rik kün
All the realms of samsara, high or low,
dukngal sum gyi trimün du
Are like dungeons of the three sufferings,
ma tsü su yangmé ngé chir
In which all are imprisoned—this is certain.
ma chak ma shyen sem chok kyé
So do not grasp! Do not be attached! But generate the supreme resolve.
di né nub kyi chok rol na
To the west of here there lies
dekyi longchö püntsok né
A place of perfect happiness and enjoyment,
dukngal mingmé dechen shying
Where even the name of suffering is unknown, a land of great bliss,
dé na gönpo tsé tayé
Wherein dwells the Lord of Boundless Life,
yé na pakpa chenrezik
To his right is noble Avalokiteśvara,
yön na tuchen tob lasok
And to his left, the mighty Vajrapāṇi,
sangye changsem pakmé kyi
All of them surrounded by countless buddhas and bodhisattvas.
korwé gosar drowar jö
Go there to that place!
khyö kyi semnyi yigé hrih
Your mind itself is the syllable Hrīḥ.
karda jishyin nyur kyö la
Swiftly now it moves, like a shooting star.
nangwa tayé tuk long du
And in the expanse of Amitābha’s wisdom mind,
yermé ro chik drepar gyur
Merges indivisibly, of a single taste.
hrih hrih hrih
Recite Hrīḥ three times and then:
phat phat phat
Phaṭ phaṭ phaṭ (three times]).
Consider that the consciousness dissolves in that realm of the three kāyas.
Then the name card of the deceased, the support produced by the two forms of ignorance, a physical
support for the 84,000 destructive emotions is burnt in the flames of primordial purity
and spontaneous presence.
hung, kadak trödral metab tu
Hūṃ. In the fireplace of primordial purity beyond conceptual elaboration,
rangjung yeshe mé barwé
The fire of naturally arising wisdom is alight,
tsenmé namtok büshing kün
And the wood and kindling of conceptual thought
lhakmé dzö chik dzala ram
Are consumed without trace: dzala ram!
nyönmong yeshe mé la sek
The destructive emotions are burned in the fire of wisdom,
dak nyi dakmé ying su sek
The two forms of self are incinerated in the space of selflessness,
künshyi marik nyi dangché
The ālaya and the two forms of ignorance
shyönnu bumkü long du sek
Are burnt away in the expanse of the youthful vase body,
khorwar dokmé gya yi dab
And the seal of never falling back into saṃsāra is applied.
dömé drol shyi ngöngyur né
Having actualized the primordial ground of liberation,
tayé dro dön yongdrub shok
May the welfare of limitless beings be accomplished!
Recite this and purify with dhāraṇīs and mantras. At the end, rest in meditative equipoise in
all-pervading space beyond conceptual elaboration.
This Excellent Path to Perfect Liberation, a guidance practice (nedren) for the Natural Liberation
of Suffering (Dukngal Rangdrol), a mind treasure of my guru, the lord of all buddha
families, was written by Jikme Trinle Özer in response to the repeated requests of Lama Sangye
Chöpel. May it be a cause for all those who have died and who lack protection to attain
omniscience!

| Rigpa Translations, 2014.
↑ Tsenjang (mtshan byang) – an effigy, photograph or name card.