The Stairway to Great Bliss: A Method for Planting the Seed of Liberation in Animals
A Supplementary Practice of the Supreme Path of Noble Dharma and Great Bliss
by Dodrupchen Jigme Trinle Özer

Nama amitābhāya!
Before Amitābha, Lord of Limitless Light,
I respectfully bow down.
In order to guide animals along the path to liberation,
I shall here set out an instruction employing skilful methods.
In this skilful method for liberating animals, begin by taking refuge and arousing bodhicitta:
changchub nyingpor chi kyi bar
Until I realise the essence of enlightenment,
sangye nam la kyab su chi
I take refuge in the buddhas,
chö dang changchub sempa yi
And likewise in the Dharma,
tsok la ang deshyin kyab su chi
And the assembly of bodhisattvas.
Three times.
dengdü dak tsé drebu yö
Today my birth has been fruitful.
mi yi sipa lekpar tob
I have well obtained a human existence.
dering sangye rik su kyé
Today I am born into the family of the buddhas.
sangye sé su da gyur to
I have become a son or daughter of the buddhas.
dani dak gi chiné kyang
From now on, at all costs, I will perform
rik dang tünpé lé tsam té
The actions befitting to my family.
kyönmé tsünpé rik di la
I will not be a stain
nyokpar mingyur detar ja
On this faultless noble family.
longwé chak dar pungpo lé
Just like a blind person
jitar rinchen nyepa tar
Happening upon a priceless jewel in a heap of rubbish,
deshyin jishyik tar té né
So, through some fortunate coincidence,
changchub sem di dak la kyé
The bodhicitta has been born in me.
dak gi dering kyobpa tamché kyi
Today, in the presence of all the protectors,
chen ngar drowa deshek nyi dang ni
I invite all beings to the state of sugata,
bardu dé la drön duwö zin gyi
And, meanwhile, to happiness and bliss:
lha dang lhamin lasok gawar gyi
Gods, asuras and others—rejoice!
Perform the cleansing (trü) ritual, dispel obstructing forces and visualize the protective sphere.
Then recite the following:
kyé, marik timuk wang gyurwé
Kyé! Through the power by ignorance and delusion,
khorwa düdrö ngöntok shar
The experiences of various animals in saṃsāra arise.
dé dok chöying yeshe kyi
As a means of averting them and bringing about
kyilkhor ngön du gyurwé tab
The mandala of dharmadhātu wisdom,
tendrel choga döndam gyi
This rite of auspicious connection,
chakgyé tab dir luwamé
Sealed with the absolute, is unfailing.
Descent of blessings:
ho, khyenpé yeshe öpakmé
Ho! Amitābha, who has the wisdom of omniscience,
tukjé terdzö pekar chang
Avalokiteśvara, treasury of compassion, holding the white lotus,
tutob özer sangwé dak
Vajrapāṇi, Lord of Secrets, radiating power and strength,
nam sum chik dril lamé jin
And the guru, who embodies them all—
düdro di la beb dzé sol
Shower down your blessings on this creature, I pray!
Prayer for averting harm and bringing benefit:
ho duk sum né sel men gyi la
Ho! Buddha of Medicine, who heals the sickness of the three poisons,
jikgyé lé drol taré ma
Noble saviouress Tārā, who protects from the eight fears,
dra kün ching dzé maritsyai
And Mārīcī, who binds enemies and thieves—
nam sum nütü düdro yi
Through the power and strength of these three,
nedön jikgyé lé drol né
May this animal be freed from sickness, harmful influences and the eight fears,
tarpa dang ni namkhyen gyi
And attain the level
gopang ngön du gyurwar dzö
Of liberation and omniscience!
Offering the support:
ho, gyalwa öpakmé gön dang
Ho! Victorious buddha Lord Amitābha,
chenrezik dang tuchen tob
Avalokiteśvara, mighty Vajrapāṇi,
men la taré maritsyai
Buddha of Medicine, Tārā and Mārīcī—
kün la düdro di tsor jé
In order to pacify the sufferings of beings in the lower realms,
ngensong dukngal shyiwé chir
But above all, this particular creature,
go sum bul lo tukjé kyob
I offer my body, speech and mind to you! Guard us with your compassion!
lama yidam khandro dang
To the guru, yidam, ḍākinī,
chökyong damchen gyatso la
And the ocean of dharmapālas and oath-bound deities,
bul lo nyertsé kün shyi né
I offer! Pacify all harm,
tarpa dang ni namkhyen gyi
And bring about all the splendour glory and wondrous qualities
pal dang yönten ngöngyur shok
Of liberation and omniscience!
Recite the dhāraṇī of long-life:
om namo bhagawate | aparimita ayurjnana subinischita tejo rajaya | tathagataya arhate samyaksambuddhaya
| tadyatha om punye punye maha punye | aparimita punye aparimita punya jnana sambharo
pachite | om sarva samskara parishuddha dharmate gagana samudgate svabhava vishuddhe
mahanaya parivare svaha |
oṃ namo bhagavate aparimitāyur-jñāna-suviniścita-tejo-rājāya tathāgatāya arhate samyak saṃbuddhāya
| tadyathā | oṃ puṇye puṇye mahā-puṇye 'parimita-puṇye 'parimita-puṇya-jñāna-saṃbhāropacite
| oṃ sarva-saṃskāra-pariśuddhe dharmate gagana-samudgate svabhāva-viśuddhe mahā-naya-parivāre
svāhā |
Aspiration prayer of prophetic speech:
ho, khorwa menpé go sumwor
Ho! Casting aside the three doors of the lower realms of saṃsāra,
tarpé sabön lek tab tü
Through the power of planting well the seed of liberation,
gyalten dar shying semchen dé
May the buddhas' teachings spread and sentient beings be happy,
ngensong dukngal yong sal né
May the suffering of the lower realms be entirely cleared away,
tarpa dang ni shyiwa chok
And may everyone attain liberation and perfect peace,
nyurdu tokmé ngönpar shok
Swiftly and without any form of obstacle!
Concluding prayer of auspiciousness:
ho, tab chok khorlo rinpoche
Ho! May the precious wheel of supreme methods
ngendro jompé tashi shok
Bring the auspiciousness of vanquishing the lower realms!
palyön norbu rinpoche
May the precious jewel of glory and qualities
dödön jungwé tashi shok
Bring the auspiciousness of granting all that we desire!
sherab tsünmo rinpoche
May the precious queen of wisdom
ga dé pelwé tashi shok
Bring the auspiciousness of increasing happiness and joy!
loden khyimdak rinpoche
May the precious householder of intelligent wit
ngatang pelwé tashi shok
Bring the auspiciousness of increasing power!
nüden langpo rinpoche
May the precious elephant of prodigious skill
shyen pung jompé tashi shok
Bring the auspiciousness of conquering opposing forces!
tsalden tachok rinpoche
May the precious horse of strength and agility
salam nyur drö tashi shok
Bring the auspiciousness of swiftly traversing the paths and stages!
tobden dam pön rinpoche
May the precious military commander of might and power
mitün chok jom tashi shok
Bring the auspiciousness of overcoming all adversity!
yangpé gyalkham tamché kün
May all the various countries and domains
dekyi püntsok tashi shok
Enjoy the auspiciousness of perfect happiness and wellbeing!
khorwé semchen tamché kün
May all the living beings within samsara
sangye tobpé tashi shok
Enjoy the auspiciousness of gaining Buddhahood!
lamé ngak kyi tekpa la
In the unsurpassable mantra vehicle
tetsom mepé tashi shok
May we enjoy the auspiciousness of lacking doubt!
rabjam trinlé tayé kyi
Through enlightened activity, limitless and infinite,
pendé pel nü tashi shok
May there be the auspicious capacity to increase benefit and happiness!
Then recite further prayers of auspiciousness, of whatever length.

This was composed by the mantra practitioner, Jigme Trinlé Özer. Through the musical sounds
of this bodhicitta intention, may all be summoned as guests to benefit and happiness! Through
this unfailing interdependence, may all attain the fruit of Buddhahood! May virtue abound!

| Translated by Adam Pearcey, 2015. With many thanks to Alak Zenkar Rinpoche for providing the
text.