The Source of Abundant Merit: A Feast-Offering for the Secret Practice of the Great Compassionate
One, Natural Liberation of Suffering
from The Heart Essence of the Vast Expanse
by the First Dodrupchen, Jikme Trinle Özer

Namo lokeśvara-gaṇacakra-pūjā hoḥ

The one who has fully perfected the two accumulations of merit and wisdom
And accomplished the twofold benefits, embodiment of the five kāyas
And protector of limitless beings, is the treasure of compassion,1
Inseparable from Jigme Lingpa, to whom I pay homage!

The concluding stages of the inner practice of the ‘Awareness-Holder Assembly’,2 which is a
mind treasure of Jigme Lingpa that arose from the Dharma’s sky-treasury, have been adapted
here for the secret practice of the Great Compassionate One, the Natural Liberation of Suffering.
Thus, the stages of the feast-gathering are as follows. Since it is said “Display
worldly sensual delights as the feast-offerings. In particular, meat and alcohol are indispensable,”
arrange food and drinks that are untainted by negative actions, according to tradition.
On this occasion, you should first recite the ‘Narak Kong Shak’.3 Then, begin by blessing the
feast-offerings.
1. The Blessing
daknyi tuk lé ram yam kham
From my heart radiate raṃ, yaṃ, and khaṃ,
tröpé tsok kyi nyekyön jang
Which purify any defects in the feast offerings.
om ah hung gi dütsir gyur
Oṃ, āḥ, and hūṃ transform them into ambrosia,
döyön namkha nyampar pel
And sensual delights increase to the limits of the sky.
ram yam kham | om ah hung
raṃ yaṃ khaṃ | oṃ āḥ hūṃ
2. Inviting the Field of Merit
hung, womin dechen shyingkham dang
Hūṃ! From the Unsurpassed,4 the pure realm of great bliss,
lhochok riwo dru dzin shyé
The Potala Mountain in the South,
tukjé chenpö shyukné dang
Which is the abode of the Great Compassionate One
drodul trulpé shyingkham né
And the Tamer of Beings’ emanated pure realm,
dukngal rangdrol lhatsok nam
Deities of the maṇḍala of Natural Liberation of Suffering,
tsok la chendren shek su sol
You are invited to this feast gathering; please come!
durtrö tsokkhang nyamré ga
The feast-gathering’s charnel house is so enchanting,
khandrö duwa bakré dro
The gathering of ḍākinīs so joyful,
naljor pomo damré tsang
The practitioners are so very pure in their samaya,
döyön tsokchö dang dangden
And the feast-offerings’ sensual delights so lustrous!
dir shek tsok la jin chen pob
Come here and bring down your blessings on this feast-gathering!
chok dang tünmong ngödrub tsol
Grant us supreme and ordinary accomplishments!5
3. Offering the First Portion
hung, tsa sum tukjé kyilkhor lha
Hūṃ! To the deities of the three roots and the Compassionate One’s maṇḍala,
drodul trulpé lhatsok la
Emanated deities of the Tamer of Beings,
döyön longchö tsokchö bul
We offer this abundant feast-offering of sensual delights.
chok dang tünmong ngödrub tsol
Grant us supreme and ordinary accomplishments!
ganachakra putsa khahi
gaṇacakra-pūjā khāhi
4. Confession
hung, dak gi tserab tokmé né
Hūṃ! In all my lives without beginning,
sang ngak tekchen gor shyuk té
Whenever I have entered the Great Vehicle of Secret Mantra,
tsawa yenlak damnyampa
Whatever impairments of the root and branch samayas have occurred,
döyön tsok kyi chöpé shak
Through offering these sensory delights of the feast-offering, I confess them all.
benza samaya ah
vajra-samaya āḥ
5. Liberation and Offering
hung, marik lé nyön zungdzin gyi
Hūṃ! Ignorance, karma, negative emotions, and dualistic grasping create
kyepé dakdzin rudra kün
All these ego-clinging rudras—
zuk la pob chik ni tri dza
Let them all be compressed into this effigy—nṛ tṛ jaḥ.
namshé chö kyi ying su pé
Their consciousness transferred into all-pervading space—phaṭ!
zukpung tsok kyi khorlor rol
And their bodies enjoyed as the feast-offering.
rudra sarva hala pentsa putsa khahi
rudra sarva hala pañca pūjā khāhi
6. Dedicating the Remainder
hung, kyilkhor chenpö muren la
Hūṃ! All you who dwell around the great maṇḍala’s edge—
nepé wangchuk ging langka
Īśvarīs, kiṃkaras and laṅgkas—
lhakmé torma di shyé la
Accept this remainder torma
naljor drubpé barché sung
And protect us from obstacles in our practice!
utsishta balingta khahi
ucchiṣṭa-baliṅta khāhi
7. Invoking the Sacred Pledge
hung, shyeng shik dukngal rangdrol lha
Hūṃ! Rise up, all you deities of the Natural Liberation of Suffering!
chö kyi ying né kur shyeng la
Out of all-pervading space, arise in your form-body!
changchub drubpé barché tul
Crush any obstacles to our accomplishment of awakening!
nöchü jungwé güpa sol
Halt the degeneration of the elements in the environment and beings!
tsalung wangtang nyampa sö
Heal any weakness in our channels, wind-energies and authentic presence!6
drubpé drebu chipar dzö
Cause our practice to bear fruition!
8. Invoking the Covenant
hung, ngöntsé womin dechen shying
Hūṃ! Long ago, in the Unsurpassed, the pure realm of great bliss,
lha né sum sok nyamgawar
In places full of joy, like the three god realms,7
sang chen gyüdé né ten tsé
When the great secret tantras were revealed,
dorjé tekpé kasung nam
The protectors of the Vajrayāna
damtsik nyenpö dral du shyak
Were bound to their solemn samaya vows.
bardu gangchen bö kyi yul
Then later in Tibet, the land of snows,
lobpön pema tötreng gi
When the master Mighty Lotus with Skull-Garland8
sang ngak chökhor korwé tsé
Turned the wheel of the Dharma of the Secret Mantra,
sipé lhasin chegu yi
He seized the life-force of all the countless gods and demons of the world
soknying trok té tsi su pab
And brought them under his command.
tama ösal dakpé shying
Finally, in the pure land of luminosity,
dewa chenpö podrang du
Within the Palace of Great Bliss,
rigdzin pema wangchen la
The vidyādhara Pema Wangchen,9
pejung drimé özer gyi
Inspired by the Lotus-Born10 and Drimé Özer,11
longchen zab gyé ukyung shying
Was empowered with the profound Vast Expanse.12
yeshe ying kyi khandromé
When the ḍākinī of the space of wisdom
longsal da ri trepé tsé
Entrusted him with the symbolic script of the radiant expanse,
zagö sok gi pudri sok
Zagö ‘Razor of the Life-Force’13 and others
kasung nyenpö khelang shyin
Took a solemn oath to protect this teaching.
chötor gyenden di shyé la
So, accept this ornamented offering torma,
lé shyi trinlé drubpar dzö
And carry out the four enlightened activities!
9. Maintaining the Relationship with the Immovable Goddesses
hung, pal gyi kanyen bö kham kyong
Hūṃ! You, attendants who obey the command of the Glorious One and protect the realm of Tibet,
masing tenma chunyi nam
Mātṛkās14 and sisters—Twelve Immovable Goddesses—15
dir jön tormé shalchu shyé
Come here and accept the torma’s cleansing water,
cholwé trinlé drubpar dzö
And carry out the activities we request of you!
mama hrim hrim balingta khahi
ma ma hriṃ hriṃ baliṅ te khāhi
10. The Horse Dance16
hung, drodul tukjé kyilkhor dir
Hūṃ! In this maṇḍala of the Compassionate One, Tamer of Beings,
lokpar drenpé damsi kün
All spirits who cause us to break our samaya and lead us astray17
nen no tekpa rim gü gya
Are suppressed, buried beneath the seal of the nine yānas.
namyang dangwar magyur chik
Let them never rise again!
tom bhayanen
sthaṃ bha ya nen
11. Receiving the Accomplishments
hung, tukjé chenpö lhatsok nam
Hūṃ! Deities of the maṇḍala of the Great Compassionate One:
nyen ching drubpé damtsik tem
Our samaya commitment of reciting and practice is fulfilled.
dorjé sempé namyang lang
The dawn of Vajrasattva is breaking,
ngödrub tsolwé dü la bab
The time has come to grant us the accomplishments.
ku sung tuk kyi kyilkhor du
From the maṇḍala of body, speech, and mind
mi né yeshe sangwa chok
With your supremely secret, non-abiding wisdom
dorjé sum gyi jin lob la
Of vajra body, speech, and mind—inspire us with your blessing, and
chok dang tünmong ngödrub kün
Grant us all the accomplishments, supreme and ordinary,
danta nyi du tobpar tsol
At this very instant!
om mani padmé hung hrih | kaya waka tsitta a la la siddhi pala hung
oṃ maṇi padme hūṃ hrīḥ | kāya-vākka-citta a la la sarva-siddhi-phala hūṃ
12. Confession of Mistakes
hung, tukjé chenpö kyilkhor du
Hūṃ! In this maṇḍala of the Great Compassionate One,
chödzé ma tsang drubpa yel
If my offerings were incomplete, my practice inattentive,
tingdzin jing muk tib lasok
Or my meditation drowsy, dull, and lifeless—
galtrul nongpa zöpar sol
Please forgive all such confusions and mistakes!
om benza sato….
oṃ vajrasattva samayam anupālaya vajrasattva-tvenopa-tiṣṭha dṛḍho me bhava sutoṣyo me
bhava supoṣyo me bhava anurakto me bhava sarva-siddhiṃ me prayaccha sarva-karma śuca me cittaṃ
śreyaṅ-kuru hūṃ ha ha ha ha hoḥ bhagavān sarva-tathāgata-vajra mā me muñca vajrī-bhava
mahā-samaya-sattva āḥ
13. Dissolution
ho, chu lé chubur dolwa shyin
Hoḥ! Like bubbles dissolving on water,
rang lé trulpé kyilkhor lha
The deities of the maṇḍala, created by myself,
yeshe ying su benza mu
Dissolve into the space of wisdom—vajra muḥ!
jetob gyumé lha kur dang
In the post-meditation, everything arises as the illusory body of the deity.
14. Dedication and Aspiration
ho, dü sum sakpé getsa kün
Hoḥ! All the roots of virtue accumulated in past, present, and future—
namkhyen dömé gyu ru ngo
I dedicate to be the cause for realizing the primordial state of omniscience,
dak sok düpar chepa nam
So that I and all those gathered here
tsombu chik tu sangye shok
All attain enlightenment together in one maṇḍala!
Three times.
15. Verses of Auspiciousness
om yé dharma hetu prabhava hetun teshan tatagato hyavadat | teshan tsa yo nirodha evam vadi
maha shramana soha
oṃ ye dharmā hetu prabhavā hetun teṣāṃ tathāgato hy avadat teṣāṃ ca yo nirodha evaṃ vādī mahāśramaṇaḥ
svāhā
ho, rigdzin gyüpé jinlab dang
Hoḥ! Through the blessing of the lineage of the vidyādharas,
könchok sum gyi denpa dang
And through the truth of the Buddha, Dharma, and Saṅgha,
sang ngak zabmö tendrel gyi
And through the auspicious interdependence of the profound Secret Mantrayāna:
jikgyé shyiwé tashi shok
May all be auspicious to pacify the eight fears!
tsesö gyepé tashi shok
May all be auspicious for developing life and merit!
nangwa wangdü tashi shok
May all be auspicious to bring perception under our control!
lokdren tsarchö tashi shok
May all be auspicious to annihilate negative, misleading forces!
nang shyen lha kü chakgyar dzok
With all attachment to perception transformed and perfected as the form of the deity,
dra drak dechen ngak su dak
All sound purified into the great bliss of mantra,
dren tok ösal chökur min
All thoughts matured into the luminosity of dharmakāya,
jalü zangtal tashi shok
May all be auspicious so that we attain the translucent rainbow body!

All the concluding practices of the ‘Awareness-Holder Assembly’ have been arranged here for
the ritual of the Natural Liberation of Suffering by the yogi Jigme Trinle Özer, at the request
of two Mongolian monks, and transcribed by Sangye Zangpo. Through the merit of this
may all beings attain the level of Buddhahood.

| Translated by Han Kop and edited by Paul Keller, 2019. Some sections adapted from Rigdzin
Düpa by Rigpa Translations.
↑ I.e., Avalokiteśvara.↑ Tib. Rigdzin Düpa.↑ Emptying the Hells from their Very Depths: The
Sovereign Practice for the Confession of all Impairments and Breakages of Vows and all Negative
Actions and Obscurations↑ Skt. Akaniṣṭha.↑ Skt. siddhi.↑ Tib. Wangtang (dbang thang).↑
In his word-by-word commentary on Yumka, Gönpo Tseten Rinpoche says that these are the
Five Pure Heavens, the Joyous Realm (Skt. Tuṣita), and the Heaven of the Thirty-Three.↑ Tib.
Pema Tötreng Tsal, in other words, Padmasambhava.↑ I.e., Jigme Lingpa.↑ I.e., Padmasambhava.↑
I.e., Longchenpa.↑ I.e., The Heart Essence of the Vast Expanse, the Longchen Nyingtik.↑
I.e., Za Rāhula.↑ Tib. Mamo.↑ Skt. sthāvarā, Tib. Tenma (brtan/bstan ma).↑ I.e., the
dance of Hayagrīva.↑ The damsi (dam sri) spirits mentioned in this line are a type of si spirit
originating from practitioners who break their samaya.